

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 3
                                                       A peep into history (III)




                                                A peep into history (III)


                                                           Nigerian Tribune
                                                        May 21, 2023 Sunday



Copyright 2023 African Newspapers of Nigeria Limited All Rights Reserved




Length: 1840 words

Body


 A young man was led into my office as the editor of The PUNCH one day decades ago; his name is Ibe Eresia-Eke
(where is he now?), Executive Chairman (as title-crazy Nigerians often over-burden the title 'Chairman' as if,
standing alone, it is not 'executive' enough!) of Ogba/Egbema/Ndoni Local Government Area of Rivers State. He
should be happy but he was not because fire was on his rooftop. His advert, which moved me to cause him to be
interviewed, is as captured below titled 'Don't break IBB's heart' Please read:

'The temptation has been strong to write to the President, General Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida, about the blatant
and disgraceful use of State power to crush and annihilate opposition party governments in Rivers State. But
knowing how much effort he has personally and gracefully invested in the democratic process, it may just be too
heart-breaking if he knows that some powerful people in my state are now practically spreading petrol over his
carefully-constructed edifice of democracy, ready to strike the match. The cases are legion now. Some of them
have already been profusely reported especially in the Sunday magazine (TSM). And certainly, many more, even
much more shocking, will be published by the fearless media outfits around, given the manner the power drunkards
are carrying on.

In the interest of our nation, however, it has become almost imperative to corroborate much of what the press is
doing to fight the wild anti-democratic trends in our dear state. I will attempt to do this by recounting some
experience that one has had lately as Chairman of Ogba/Egbema/Ndoni Local Government Area, one of the LGA s
controlled by the opposition party in Rivers State, but where can I start from; what do I state; what do I leave out, in
this short piece? Anyway, let's just take a case and be brief.

During the councillors bye-elections of Saturday, 19th July, 1992, state force literally over-ran the LGA beating,
intimidating indigenes of the area, and destroying properties. Naturally, people reached for the recesses of their
houses to hide. Voters had to face the concern of escaping with life, a fortiori standing on the queue to vote. Of
course, this sounds so much like fiction. It is almost incredible. But we can list even the numbers of vehicles
employed in the operation, namely: RV 8119 DA, RV 8075 DA (both belonging to the Rivers State Transport
Corporation). And to clear any stubborn doubts about the source of the vehicles, there was also a Toyota Jeep with
registration number 25 RSVG 9. The vehicles, loaded with uniformed policemen and thugs, fired with the zeal of
men on a State mission and armed to the teeth to do havoc to persons and property.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 3
                                                A peep into history (III)

As you may have guessed, many indigenes, including those standing in the election on the platform of the
opposition party, were bundled to far-away Port Harcourt, the seat of power, to be locked away and (to
be)thoroughly tortured. The private house of Dr. Kingdom Ogbangba, Deputy Minority Leader in the State House of
Assembly, was verily vandalised and damaged. Let us leave out things too obscene to be published in a
respectable medium like this! Of course, you may already have guessed this: At the end of the day, 'election results'
were announced and landslide victories were recorded. It may be reasonable to ask: What did the police in the area
do when all this was being perpetrated? But what does a conscientious and upright police DPO and his men do in
the face of 'superior onslaught', knowing the command structure of our police system? Indeed, as if to add salt to
injury, shortly after an earlier DPO was transferred out of the area, probably for being uncooperative, his successor
faces the same fate already. A local paper has, in fact, reported that the DPO has been threatened by kulaks with
the right party connections with 'immediate transfer' from the LGA. Of course, much of all this only goes to
corroborate and confirm reports of intention to destabilise; annihilate the local government controlled by the
'opposition party' and impeach its Chairman by 'all means possible'. Part of the strategy has been to spread all
manner of calumny against the local government and its Chairman to cause disaffection in the local community,
hoping to garner a major unrest within the area and then nullify the government and appoint a sole administrator.
Given the grassroots support of the government, however, and the grace of Almighty God, none of their wishes
have materialised.

But the fight is being intensified through all means as promised. Already police have reported that at least three of
their most influential agents... have made very desperate efforts to use our councillors by offering them huge sums
of money to sign a document containing cooked-up allegations against my person (the LG chairman). The reports
have, in fact, pleaded with the police to 'commence thorough investigations to find out their financiers. I will not
relent until their allegations against the Deputy Governor are proved' The outcome of the investigation has not
reached my office but what is evident is that four formally loyal councillors have resigned. Many believe they fell for
the huge financial inducements offered them. The whole game-plan is to weaken the numerical strength of the loyal
councillors, inject their own men and, finally, impeach or turn me into a stooge taking instructions from Government
House. Whether this works or not remains to be seen.

For good measure, let me add that given the devilish desperation with which they are purchasing their fancy 'by all
means', whatever happens to me should be traced to them. To be sure, this tendency to deal with the LGA
governments of the opposite parties all over the State is the same. But the import of all this comes once one
extrapolates what is happening in Rivers State to all the states in the federation. Viewed from that perspective, it
comes out clearly that the gravitation is towards annihilating the opposite parties even at the Local government
level. Gradually, this tendency may infect the entire nation and two consequences are possible: That all should
acquiesce and join one party or resist and fight back. Whichever way the reaction comes, it spells the end of
democracy once again.

This is why I had thought that, maybe, IBB should not see this because given the investment in time, men and
resources that have gone into erecting the democratic edifice this time; these trends may break his heart. But one
thing is very certain, the security forces must do something fast to arrest the 'hoodlums against democracy' in
whatever guise they may appear, be they deputy (or despotic) governors!'

How did events eventually play out? That was during the unending transition to civil rue rigmarole of IBB beginning
in the 1980s, which eventually climaxed in the June 12, 1993 elections which MKO Abiola won fair and square but
which was annulled by the IBB junta, throwing the country into a political logjam or impasse that was not resolved
until after five despotic years of the vilest dictator of them all, Gen. Sani Abacha, and the benevolent dictatorship of
Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar, stained, however, with the death in detention of Abiola. With the benefit of hindsight
today, can we not say that the confidence reposed by Eresia-Ike in IBB as the defender of democracy was
misplaced, given that the self-same IBB annulled the freest and fairest election in the land, thereby wasting the
huge resources expended on the process and truncating democracy? The shenanigans that caused Eresia-Ike to
run from pillar to post took place some four decades ago: Can we say we have made appreciable progress or are
we still trapped in the woods? Do opposition parties fare better today? I leave everyone to judge!

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 3
                                               A peep into history (III)

If he looks back today at his illustrious but chequered career, I think I can guess a few things that must have broken
IBB's heart. One is the parcel bomb that killed the celebrated journalist, Dele Giwa, on 19 October, 1986 during
IBB's watch. The unresolved nature of the dastardly murder must be giving the former military president sleepless
nights. More so if the reported last words of Giwa: 'This must be from Mr. President' continues to ring in IBB's ears.
The Major Gideon Gwaza Orkar coup of 22 April, 1990 is another incident that may give IBB heartbreak. IBB
escaped by the whiskers but not before the coupists had taken him and his government to the cleaners. The terrible
things said about IBB, if they continue to ring in his ears, may trouble his heart. The outgoing government of Gov.
Samuel Ortom of Benue State must have opened old wounds and pointedly directed an arrow at IBB's heart when,
last week, he announced a decision to honour Orkar by not only naming a street after him but by also justifying
some of his allegations against IBB and his administration.

The 'SAP with a human face' letter written by former President Olusegun Obasanjo to IBB was said to have
unsettled and rattled the gap-toothed self-styled military president. Not given to pulling punches, Obasanjo
pummeled IBB and his government hard, accusing both of putting Nigerians through unthinkable suffering and
unmitigated misery. Whenever IBB thinks of a man who hits you hard but you dare not hit him back, his heart may
break. Next is the IMF debate during which Nigerians rejected the IMF loan and its conditions but IBB and Chief Olu
Falae, at first IBB's Secretary to the Federal Government and later Minister of Finance; went ahead against popular
opinion to accept the loan. That decision laid the foundation for the decimation of the Naira. If the national currency
has lost a huge percentage of its old value today, the blame rests with IBB and Falae, aka Mr. SAP. Which
conscionable leader will remember that and not suffer heartbreak?

I can go on and on! The execution, on 5 March, 1986, of Gen. Mamman Jiya Vasta, said to be a childhood and
bosom friend of IBB, by the same IBB, cannot but give anyone a heartbreak, especially when, years later, Gen.
Domkat Bali, who had announced to a bewildered nation the execution of the alleged coupists 'about an hour ago'
was quoted as saying he was not sure they were right in the decision they took! Who will hear that and his heart will
not break, especially each time the media decides to conduct interviews with Vatsa's widow and children that
opened old wounds? IBB's decision to step aside on 27 August, 1993 was not an easy one. Reports had it that his
wife and glamorous First Lady, Maryam, never brooked that. As editor of The PUNCH, we published a daily
'Countdown to Democracy... so and so days to go' which impeccable sources said enraged Maryam. 'Who told
them we are going!' she was quoted as saying! But go, they did and could that not have broken IBB's heart? IBB
stepped aside and has not been able to step back in ever since. Seeing Obasanjo and, next, Muhammadu Buhari
achieve the feat of military Head of State and, later, civilian President, is that not enough to break IBB's heart?


Load-Date: May 22, 2023


  
