

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 3
                                       Unbalanced chequered checks: Judiciary fumbles




                        Unbalanced chequered checks: Judiciary fumbles
                                                          The Sun (Nigeria)
                                                      April 11, 2019 Thursday



Copyright 2019 The Sun Publishing Limited Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 1038 words
Byline: Rapheal

Body


Victor C. Ariole Time to reconstitute the entire NJC for failing in its duties by allowing the executive to meddle in its
affairs out of negligence of duty. Montesquieu, a great French philosopher, knew that the expression: "l'état c'est
moi"- "I am the state; I decide who stays alive or who must be executed". As seen [...]
The post Unbalanced chequered checks: Judiciary fumbles appeared first on The Sun Nigeria.

Victor C. Ariole

Time to reconstitute the entire NJC for failing in its duties by allowing the executive to meddle in its affairs out of
negligence of duty.

Montesquieu, a great French philosopher, knew that the expression: "l'état c'est moi"- "I am the state; I decide who
stays alive or who must be executed". As seen in the powerful King of France, was greatly abhorrent to humanity.
Voltaire, Rousseau, Montesquieu and Diderot, et al, embarked on an enlightenment documentation of a new
France with lots of paper works and pamphlets to acquaint the French people of what it means to be really free;
viz: knowledge, education empowerment.

Documentation on checks and balances of power and separation of power became one of the magnum opus of
their performance. Unlike what is happening to Nigeria, their Chief Justice (Président de Cour Suprème) very much
in agreement with their Attorney General (and the keeper of the Seal, Ministre de la Justice et Garde Des Sceaux)
do not allow their profession to be compromised or ridiculed; they must agree before the nation's seal is applied on
any deal or bill.

The Chief Justice is the current day seer or judge of the then Jewish tradition of Samuel's time before, out of
foolishness, they demanded for a king. When people say Igbos don't have king, they just failed to know that it is a

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 3
                                  Unbalanced chequered checks: Judiciary fumbles

revolved tradition and that Montesquieu thought of replacing in one powerful person what some members of free
press see as the square and the sword. Equilateral, square or triangle, of power, joined by the press that must not
falter if the wrath of the sword should be avoided. In effect the expected sword of the new dispensation is the press
but they seem to be faltering also. "The pen is mightier than the sword" obliges. So, it calls for a stronger press as
the fourth realm of the State; assurance coverage for press people by the State, even if it is one press person for
every media house, is necessary; that means, the elected watchdog of watchdogs certified by the nation. That is
how it works in France to the extent that the fear of a journalist is the beginning of a political wisdom.

They proved that to their ever greatest president yet to be surpassed; General Charles de Gaulle. Like said earlier,
the Chief Justice is always supported by the Minister of Justice to an extent that a Muslim lady as Minister of Justice
– Rachida – during Sarkozy presidency, stood by the constitution not minding what people of her faith said about
her or what the presidency expected her to do when individual's or faith's interest clashes with he constitution.

That was, also, how General Charles de Gaulle was meant to resign to pave way for their current 5th Republic as
they saw his humiliation as the total failure of what their 4th Republic's constitution represented. In effect, it was not
De Gaulle per se but the constitution. He still remained vindicated till today as he was begged to take on the
Presidency of their reconstituted 5th Republic.

The resignation of Nigeria's Chief Justice Ononghen is a "Jamais Vu"as per "Déjà Vu" of Heads of State in France
or elsewhere. In effect, the entire NJC is to be disbanded. Three of France's presidents could not enter second term
as judicial concerns were already raised before their attempt at it – Giseard d'Estaing, Nicholas Sarkozy, François
Hollande. François Hollande's own was even made worse as journalists scooped with precision his sexual
escapades even when it was not meant to be judicial issue because in France the private live of the President is
entirely his affair as long as it does not conflict with his official duty.

In Nigeria, the legislature and the judiciary seem not to stand firm on their own grounds of protecting the minimum
governance square. So, if the executive is the only side of the square that must stand firm, then the total square is
unbalanced, chequered and inconsistent with what Montesquieu intended. Adjusted to Africa's circumstance, some
elements of elderly statesmen pronouncement should be part also.

In effect, for Nigerian's constitution to stand the test of time, the press council must be presided by a person
covered by immunity; the legislature must be presided by a security cleared leader, the press, and the judiciary; the
judiciary, also, must have a leader cleared by the press, the bar and the bench.

As politics is not easily defined by ethics, the executive, in effect, becomes what other sides of the square are to
monitor to avoid the derailment of the State like France did by not giving chances to Sarkozy, Giscard and Hollande
for a second term. Note that a discreet François Mitterrand stayed on for 14 years – two terms, then, as against 10
years after him – notwithstanding his shielded bigamous private life. Nigerian Press, Nigerian Legislature, Nigerian
Judiciary must be seen as the pillars that hold the upper side of the square that must be seen as stable so as to
buttress Montesquieu stance and to avoid what French people see, today, as Voltaire's wrong stance of laicity or
secularity, when their side of the press started faltering; that is, the press must be responsible and responsive as
well as proactive to avoid weak prosecution or whistle blowing that make mockery of the State and its leaders.

When the press scoops, let it be provable beyond reasonable doubt and endorsed by State assured press person.
Assurance cover is crucial here to avoid Dele Giwa's thankless devotion.

Resignation of the CJN, like that of the France's President in their 4th Republic, necessitates a constitutional review
as well as the total resignation of all the members of Nigerian Judicial Council.

ARIOLE is a Professor of French and Francophone Studies University of Lagos.

The post Unbalanced chequered checks: Judiciary fumbles appeared first on The Sun Nigeria.


Load-Date: April 11, 2019

                                                                   Page 3 of 3
                  Unbalanced chequered checks: Judiciary fumbles




