

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 4
                                        Uwaila Omozuwa: Rape, Murder So Gruesome!




                           Uwaila Omozuwa: Rape, Murder So Gruesome!
                                                    Daily Independent (Nigeria)
                                                         June 5, 2020 Friday



Copyright 2020 Daily Independent. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 1765 words
Byline: Ugochukwu Ejinkeonye

Body


UGOCHUKWU E J INKEONYE

"One life taken in cold blood is as gruesome as millions lost in a pogrom."—Dele Giwa (Late Nigerian Journalist)

After five whole years of seeking admis­sion into the institution of higher learning, Miss Vera Uwaila Omozuwa was
eventually admitted to read Microbiology at the Uni­versity of Benin. Obviously a very serious student, she was in
no mood to joke with her studies, probably, after considering how long it took her to secure the admission. So, she
would always go to the serene en­vironment of her Church when worship­pers were not around to read her books.
The Church environment should be both safe and devoid of distractions.

But on this particular day, May 27, 2020, some wicked, callous and barbarous as­sailants gained access to the
Church au­ditorium where she was immersed in her books, brutally raped her and ended her life by hitting her on
the head with a fire extinguisher which gave her a very deep cut. They then fled leaving her in the pool of her own
blood. She was only 22 and in her first year at the university.

No one knew how long she lay there bleeding until the security man arrived and saw her. She was already
unconscious, probably due to the effect of the brutal vi­olation she had experienced and the cruel blow she had
received, from whose wound she must have lost so much blood. At the hospital where she was rushed to, the
doc­tors tried their best but were unable to re­vive her. She eventually died without being able to utter a single word
to anyone about what had happened to her or whether she was able to recognize her savage rapists and
murderers.

The gory picture of her body is the most horrible image I have tried to look at in re­cent times. I had to remove my
eyes imme­diately! A once beautiful girl had suddenly turned into a horrific and scary image because of the
primeval exploits of some brutish creatures.

Loading...

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 4
                                   Uwaila Omozuwa: Rape, Murder So Gruesome!

Now, what exactly could so badly pro­voke human beings to descend so low to the level of wild beasts to give free
rein to their basest instincts to unleash such a barbaric violence on another human be­ing? Lust, anger, hatred,
sadism, desire to conquer and dominate, revenge, or what? Are more and more people losing their hu­manity? Has
the world gone irrecoverably berserk? Daily, dizzying reports of grown men raping grandmothers, mothers, single
women and even underage girls are rough­ly slapped on our faces. I have even read bloodcurdling accounts of ten
or even eight month-old babies raped, not by confirmed mentally challenged people, but by other­wise sane human
beings! What exactly is happening? I think this should be a very rich research subject for our scholars in the fields
of psychology and behavioural studies. We need to urgently understand what has gone wrong with our world.

The parents of Uwaila are badly heart­broken as outrage engulfs the country over their daughter's barbaric murder.
In a vid­eo that surfaced on twitter early this week, Uwaila's father lamented:

"It was not a mistake; it was not a fault; it was not stubbornness for her to go to the church to study. She had been
going there for several years. She struggled for five years before she gained admission into UNIBEN. I was waiting
to celebrate her admission be­fore she died."

When has it become an offence for a se­rious and focused student to find a condu­cive place to read, more so, a
worship centre which should be considered sacred and in­violable? Who could be so godless, wanton and profane
as to trail a girl to a church building to unleash this kind of harrowing and deadly violence on her? Such a person
should have no place within the bounds of civilised society.

Narrating the horrific incident, Uwaila's mother mournfully recounted:

"I saw a friend, who came to visit me, off and before I came back, someone had called my telephone thrice. When I
got back, my children told me that a church member, Mummy Osunla, had called me and when I called her back,
she asked where I was and told me that I should come and that she did not know what had happened to my
daugh­ter.

"I ran to the place but before I got there, they [had] already [taken] her to a private hospital and when I saw my
daughter, I cried. They raped her; the dress she was wearing that morning was white, but it had turned to red; all
her body was full of blood. Her mouth and eyes were tied; the hoodlums used a fire extinguisher to hit her head,
which left a deep cut.

"We were asked to take her for an X-ray on her head; I did not have money but my church members tried and
money was raised and we bought all the drugs that we were asked to buy, but Uwa could not make it. She was
unable to say anything till she died; it was just tears that were coming out from her eyes."

The national outrage this grisly incident has provoked is quite reassuring, but the security agencies should be more
creative and proactive about how to ensure that peo­ple that commit these hideous crimes are apprehended and
punished. It should now be made compulsory that CCTVs must be installed in all public buildings including worship
centres. This will go a long way deter potential rapists and other criminals who will know that their criminal activities
are not hidden. The installation of these cameras should be extended to the streets and even highways. No amount
spent on en­hancing the security of lives and property should be considered too much. The po­lice must equally be
empowered to acquire more, modern crime-unravelling equip­ment, so as to be able to track criminals no matter
how they try to evade justice

It is however encouraging that the Edo Police Command has announced the arrest of one of the suspected killers of
Uwaila. Its spokesperson, Chidi Nwabuzor, said that fingerprints the fire extinguisher used in killing the hapless girl
has led to the arrest of the suspect. We can only hope that the fingerprint readings are accurate and that this first
arrest will lead to the arrest of the remaining criminals who are now on the run. When perpetrators of crimes are
pun­ished, prospective criminals are dissuaded and society is made safer for everyone.

When the news of Uwaila's murder broke, Edo State Governor, Mr. Godwin Obaseki tweeted: "I have ordered the
Nige­ria Police Force (@PoliceNG) to thoroughly investigate the circumstances that led to the death of Miss Vera
Uwaila Omozuwa, a 100-level student of the University of Benin (UNIBEN).

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 4
                                  Uwaila Omozuwa: Rape, Murder So Gruesome!

Later, on Tuesday, June 2, President Mu­hammadu Buhari added his voice to the high profile orders handed down
to the po­lice to their job. "I expect the Nigeria Police Force to speedily and diligently investigate this case and
ensure that all the culprits re­sponsible for this barbaric act are brought to justice," the president reportedly said.

Good! Heartwarming response! But I would always cherish a country where the police and other security agencies
can al­ways do their jobs without being ordered to do so by the governor or president. Each time there is an attack
by terrorists or ban­dits in which the casualty figures are high enough to attract national outrage, we will be served
with the news that President Bu­hari has ordered the security agents to ap­prehend the perpetrators. I always recoil
with shame each time I stumble on such strange reports. It has even been report­ed in this country that the
president had ordered the Air Force to bomb terrorist strongholds! This one is even more sick­ening because it is
like informing the ter­rorists to relocate because bombs will soon start raining on their locations. Who does that
anywhere?

I would like to see Nigerian security in­stitutions grow and be truly independent. They should be able to do their jobs
con­scientiously whether the crime attracted widespread uproar or not, whether they got instructions from the
president, governor or nobody. Unraveling crimes and arresting the people behind them should be normal, routine
work for them. They do not need to be prodded or ordered to go after criminals, apprehend and bring them to
justice.

There is also this little but very injurious matter that deserves mention here since it keeps reoccurring. When crimes
like rape or any kind violence are committed against women, there are usually some outspoken ladies who are
quick to not just condemn the crime and call for justice for the victim, but readily turn the incident into an
oppor­tunity to initiate an anti-men campaign. They would stretch their power of their oratory and emotions to brand
ALL men rapists and women-killers in order to widen the valley of animosity between the male and the female. This
might earn them the very lucrative identity they are craving but would not make our world any better. When the
records of rape cases are a thoroughly examined, it might even be discovered that male rapists may not even
constitute up to one percent of the male population.

Both genders are needed in the fight against this hideous crime – which is even committed against both women and
men. Demonizing all men each time gender-based crimes occur may help those who insist on doing it to achieve
some self-serving creden­tials, but it will inject a serious setback in the larger campaign by depleting the sup­port
from men which is highly required to lend the war some beneficial balance and eventually win it. All men are not
rapists or supporters of rape, that should be very clear. Since the Uwaila incident, many men have gone all out
condemning the crime and calling for justice for the victim. It would help to seek NOT to discourage them by
unleashing a fallacy of generalization that seeks to tar all of them with the egregious brush of women haters and
violators.

As I tried to tidy up this piece yester­day afternoon, a newsflash came in that a 19-year old female student was
raped and stabbed to death in her own father's house in Ibadan. Narrating the incident, the obviously shattered
father of the victim said: "Somebody called me on the phone that I should come home but he refused to tell me
what happened. When I got home, I saw that my daughter had been raped and stabbed to death."

I hope the Oyo State Police Command will not wait for any "orders" from the gov­ernor or a national outcry to
thoroughly investigate the matter and bring the per­petrators to book. Rape is ugly. Let's all help to discourage it by
ensuring that its perpetrators are always punished.

http://imgs.syndigate.info/633/1803/74/159133335292.jpeg

http://imgs.syndigate.info/633/1803/37/159133335295.jpeg

http://imgs.syndigate.info/633/1803/35/159133335332.jpeg

http://imgs.syndigate.info/633/1803/76/159133335339.jpeg

                                                                      Page 4 of 4
                          Uwaila Omozuwa: Rape, Murder So Gruesome!


Load-Date: June 5, 2020


  
