

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 4
                                                Uneven Steps: Journey of nightmares




                                  Uneven Steps: Journey of nightmares


                                                        The Nation (Nigeria)
                                                   October 27, 2021 Wednesday



Copyright 2021 The Nation All Rights Reserved




Length: 1978 words

Body


 It is not often that you have a book review begin with the author; but the fact remains that the content of a book is
as good as the writer. The author transfers his knowledge and personage onto the package. The integrity of the
author gives impetus to the book and believability to the content.

The author of Uneven Steps: The story of the Nigerian Guild of Editors (NGE), Mr Lanre Idowu, can be described
as a tested combatant and a Field Marshall in journalism. He is a frontline participant in its affairs and a first class
traveller in the journey of the Guild of Nigerian Editors (NGE). So writing about the journey of the guild, for him, is
like relieving an experience.

The main title of the book, Uneven Steps summarises the story of the guild. It signposts a travel episode of a giant
who toddles along on a necessary trip harassed by headwinds: climbing hills and descending valleys with pain and
stress; yet clinging on to the hope that along the way it will encounter a benevolent spirit that will confer on it the
kind of status commensurate with public expectations of its members.

A giant that is always apprehensive of the verdict of history, going by the original intentions of the founding fathers;
and the realities of modern times, particularly as it affects the practice and the status of the body of practitioners. A
journey full of nightmares: some imagined, some imposed; but largely self-inflicted.

The book narrates how sometimes the guild moves closer to attainment of its ideals; but as hope rises, the factors
that hold all of us and the country hostage sneak in, and the light dims and the concert goes awry. When it
happens, the editors and the guild walk the scene with uneven steps. Editors are not alien to sour grapes, they
encounter them in their search for what makes them what they are; in the process they eat some, and the
experience often has never been palatable.

So, going through the book, it looks obvious that the state of the NGE, which is just about a year younger than the
country itself, is not different from the story of the country - audacious but not firmly established, moving but
unstable. At some stage the steps would be firm but along the line they would wobble and then become uneven. In
fact, a giant with feet of clay!

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 4
                                        Uneven Steps: Journey of nightmares

The guild was given birth to by great minds and 'ancestors' of the journalism profession, eminently acknowledged in
Chapter Three. It was produced in the factory of rebellion, to avert annihilation by capitalists who saw the media as
the vehicle to drive and sustain their ambitions. It was also to stave off discrimination in the Nigeria Union of
Journalists (NUJ). It was, therefore, a child of circumstance.

Idowu says it was, in part, the product of reverse discrimination in the NUJ. The editor was a hired hand who could
be directed and fired at will. But editors are not agberos whose major pre-occupation is to load vehicles with no
qualms as to capacity and safety considerations. The agbero's interest is to load the vehicle and get his
commission - whether or not the vehicle gets to its destination safely, is none of his business. Editors are not cast in
that mold.

The pioneers wanted protection and relevance; they needed to do their jobs professionally, and with integrity. They
formed the guild. They started the journey well, but the vagaries of weather and the harshness of the geopolitical
tendencies coupled with the whims of the economic climate affected the smoothness of the journey, leading to
tiredness, stress, despondency and ultimately uneven steps.

Notwithstanding tha Idowu himself is a high priest in the congregation, he never pulled his punches where the
sacrament went sour. He never also failed to beam the shining lights where appropriate. He is not one who allows
sentiments to interfere with his conclusions. Wherever he saw a spade, he called it by its real name.

The book is done in a 6×9 inches format with 214 pages, including 20 pages of front matter (Dedication,
Abbreviations, Tables, Foreword, Preface and acknowledgements) and 45 pages of back matter (References,
Appendixes and Indexes). There are 16 pages of images of past officials and events of the Guild. It is a catalogue
of the triumphs and travails of the Guild in its sixty years. It is dedicated to the continued search for meaning and
responsibility in the media and its promotion as a strong pillar of democracy and an agent of national development.

The main section starts with abbreviations of regular organs and institutions mentioned in the book; then tables of
laws and cases, followed by the Foreword written by a revered 'ancestor' of the profession, the late Prince Tony
Momoh. The author wrote the Preface covering almost three and half pages. Acknowledgements and the Content
pages follow before the first chapter.

The main story is set in 17 chapters. The first chapter talks about the birth of the guild - In the beginning; followed
by The Press and Independence; The Guilds founding fathers; The Guild under military rule (1966-79); the Guild in
the Second Republic (1979 - 1983); In search of the Guild (1983 - 1988); Resuscitation of the Guild (1988);
Between Resurgence and Grovelling (1988-1992) and the Guild and Military Repression (19933 - 1998), in that
order.

Other chapters include: A more assertive Guild; Constitutional Crises in the Guild; The Guild's fellowship Award;
Who is an Editor; The Editor in the Digital Age; The Associate Membership Conundrum; Who funds the Guild and
The future of the Guild.

The book paints the Guild as a not too healthy child: a child with a fainting spirit; a body that is often missing in
action during critical times - it disappears and returns limp; often brought back to life through a resuscitation
process. For instance, in Chapter Six: In search of the Guild (1983 -1988), Idowu wrote that during the turbulent
years of Decree No. 4 of 1984 when 'the law was in no mood for journalistic adventurism' and when media houses
were haunted at will, including the proscription of Newswatch magazine (Proscription from Circulation, Decree No.6
of 1987), the guild was in limbo.

He put it this way: 'While the NPAN and NUJ were in touch with the government to cut short the ban of Newswatch,
the editors were missing in action. Since the fallout of the Minna Convention of 1982, there had been no
professional body of editors to engage government'. It took some kind of Necodemus moves, using some editors in
government-owned media as medics, to bring the ailing Guild back to life. Idowu saw the move as part of the grand
design by 'government to woo the press, construct a semblance of amity and empanel a professional association
for periodic engagement'.

                                                                                                         Page 3 of 4
                                        Uneven Steps: Journey of nightmares

Pages 56 to 63 covering two chapters unveiled the helpless and seemingly escapist nature of the Guild at some
point, even in the face of threats, torments, torture and emasculation of its members and the media. For instance on
page 57, veteran journalist Chris Okolie was quoted (1988) as telling an executive member: 'During the murder of
Dele Giwa your executive kept mute. So, too, was your executive helpless when Ray Ekpu was charged with
murder and arson. The executive did nothing when Daily Sketch and Tribune editors were put under pressure.
Likewise the same executive looked the other way when Newswatch was proscribed for publishing the Politbureau
report'.

The Guild was still recuperating when new viruses were introduced into its system - the regular trademark of our
woes as a political entity - Region and Religion. Coupled with the non- categorical definition of who an editor is in
the electronic media, these became the underlying ailments that further crippled the Guild, a disability it is still
struggling with till this day.

It was at the Minna Convention of 1982 that the infection occurred. In spite of the quality of practitioners then, the
fumes of politics and the rascality in some quarters choked the Guild and it was placed on a ventilator until the
Babangida regime in 1988 applied pressure on its chest; and was subsequently revived by proxy editors from
government-owned organisations. Chapters Six and Seven deal with those issues.

So, did the Guild get well soon? Chapters Seven to Nine did not seem to discharge the patient, as the record shows
that the status was between resurgence and groveling, especially as members came under another round of
military repression between 1993 and 1998. It was not until 1998 that the Guild was on its feet and became more
assertive; but the excitement of recovery after being bedridden for a long period and the zeal to fortify its ranks
against another epidemic of the Minna dimension led to a constitutional crisis that almost returned the Guild to the
casualty ward (Chapter 11).

One nagging symptom that is yet to find appropriate prescription and remedy is the editor himself. Who is the Editor
and who should be a member of the NGE? If an ailment is not properly defined and diagnosed, prescription and
treatment become difficult. And that's a major challenge of the Guild. From the presentation, this seems to have
become a problem since the Minna Convention, as indicated in Chapter Five.

In Chapter 13, Idowu states that the original intention of the Guild was to have a club of de jure and de facto editors
who, in law and in fact, determine what goes into publications. This, it is stated, made it easier for the founding
fathers to agree on who a newspaper editor or deputy was. 'It was also not controversial to determine who qualified
as an associate member'.

Throughout the book, the issue of professionalism and ethics rings loud. The desirability or otherwise of a Press
Council can also be found in chapter 4. In fact in Chapter 8, the book quotes one of the Guild's past presidents,
Alhaji Waida Maida as having told his colleagues in 1991 that 'the media are gradually losing believability and we
must do something to arrest this trend. We ought to appreciate the weight of our responsibility in the sustenance of
democratic rule once the military hands over to the civilians'. Whether that has been achieved, the answer blows in
the wind.

It's not all gloom. Apart from indications in about three preceding chapters, the concluding chapter on the Future of
the Guild states clearly that there is a lot to commend the body for, if assessed by its stated objectives. For one, the
search for a code of ethics has been successfully completed and periodic enlivening of its provisions, especially at
periods of general elections, is ongoing.

The author displays a monumental power of recall and a professional grasp of perspectives. He made about 74
citations from key players to back up his narrative on particular subject matters. The book is a befitting trophy for
the Guild at 60. It is one book that every journalist, journalism teacher, journalism school and those interested in
the growth of journalism practice, should have. In fact, it should find space in every library. It is both a reference
book and a history book.

The writer has done his bit in chronicling the journey of the Guild in the last 60 years of its existence. Although the
founding fathers championed a course that was meant to give impetus to the practice and the profession, lack of

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 4
                                       Uneven Steps: Journey of nightmares

trust and leadership incongruities threatened the concord that existed in the fold at the beginning, a development
that has persisted till this day.

There is, therefore, the need for members to arise, like the tribune of old, and form a vanguard to protect and pilot
the affairs of the body. We must channel all our efforts towards building a strong independent body that can, in one
accord, deliver a sucker punch when challenged. We must resolve at all times to remain steadfast to the ideals of
the profession and the nurturing of a galaxy of stars. We should be an inspiration to other professional bodies, God
being our guardian.


Load-Date: October 28, 2021


  
