

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                                   A lifetime of gratitude




                                                A lifetime of gratitude
                                                    The Nation (Nigeria)
                                                December 27, 2018 Thursday



Copyright 2018 The Nation All Rights Reserved

Length: 1192 words

Body


 I feel honored to be named as one of the recipients of this year's Lifetime Achievement Awards for Media
Excellence by the trustees of the Diamond Awards for Media Excellence Trust Fund. I wish to express my deep
gratitude to the trustees and in particular to Lanre Idowu, the supervising trustee of the group. Since I graduated
into the club of the aged by becoming 70 in August, I consider this award as DAME's birthday present to an old
man.

DAME has done a wonderful job for our industry by standing guard over the professionalism, practices and ethics of
our journalists and recognizing excellence through its yearly awards to deserving journalists across the entire media
universe in Nigeria. Their exertions are worthy of our gratitude and commendation. I salute them.

In 2016, my brother, friend and business partner, Dan Agbese, was honoured by DAME with its Lifetime
Achievement Award. Dan and I graduated from the University of Lagos' Department of Mass Communication in
1973. Fate took us in different directions as we tried to find the markets where we would sell the words in our
heads. Again fate paved a common path for us and together, in 1984, with two other friends, Dele Giwa and
Yakubu Mohammed, we embarked on the Newswatch adventure at a perilous time in the life of our nation. Since
then, Dan and I have been together and like a Catholic marriage, there has been no divorce; we remain together
like gin and tonic.

During our last days in Unilag, we used to debate amongst us as to whether or not anyone of us might get a first
class degree. We dismissed the idea outright on the ground that mass communication did not possess the precision
of mathematics or engineering. It was perhaps a dissonance reduction formula on our part since in our hearts, and
at our sober moments, we probably didn't think we had risen to that apogee of excellence. For our sanity it was
better for us to say to ourselves that if none of us got a first class, it was because it was unachievable not because
we were lazy or unintelligent.

And then the following year, 1974, a man called Olatunji Dare got a first class from that same department and
proved us wrong. He went on to become a great columnist in The Guardian and a great scholar both in Nigeria and
the United States. I am honoured to be receiving a lifetime achievement award with the great man today. I
remember an article that Tunji contributed to the popular page 7 of Daily Times in 1978, titled 'The Bus Stop Man', a
metaphorical excursion into the life of the urban underclass, the ghetto guy with obsessive qualities of rowdiness
and gragra-ness. That evocative piece received a standing ovation nationwide. Tunji went on to establish himself
firmly on the tablets of our minds as a great writer, humorist and satirist. Each time I tried my hands on satire I
always came short. Satire has its perils. Some think it is some form of Afghanistanism, a flight from a fight or from a

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 2
                                                  A lifetime of gratitude

direct hit, a weapon of the artful dodger, an excuse not to speak uncomfortable truth directly to power. These
assertions belong apparently to those who are intellectually challenged. Satire is an admirable genre that has
endured and those who have mastered it as Tunji has deserve an ovation.

In March 2010, I was given a Lifetime and Inspiration Award by the Nation Media Group in Kenya, publishers of the
Nation newspaper. The paper was 50 years old then and at 62 then, I was 12 years older than the paper. Four
other journalists from Eastern, Central, Northern and Southern Africa were also honoured with the award on that
occasion. On that occasion I felt like the man who was asked the simple question, 'How are you?' And he answered
with a parable, 'The ground is not even but I am standing on it.' By this time Newswatch had gone through the
bruising cycle of birth, death and resurrection as a corporate entity. Its founders and staff had been thrown into jail a
few times and these multiple hammer blows, these hard knocks, had taken their toll on the organisation's corporate
health. The recognition was deeply appreciated but I wasn't in the mood to break into song and dance because the
responsibility of running a media organisation in Nigeria with all the uncertainties, the asphyxiating operating
environment and the hostility of officialdom to truthful journalism were enough to take your attention away from
considerations of jollification.

Now I am free from those enormous pressures even though as a retiree without pension or gratuity, I don't even
have the opportunity to stay on the queue like most pensioners-and collapse now and again-as they wait for the
favour of being paid their legitimate entitlements. What a country! But I am happy that I am able to keep myself
physically fit and mentally agile by continuing to engage in matters of the mind through column writing and
mentoring some young minds in our profession.

I didn't know I would live to be 70 because life is a perilous adventure and in Nigeria it is even more perilous. A
petrol tanker can fall and spill its dangerous content near where you work or play or live and you are dead. A house
badly built by an irresponsible, a get-rich quick, corner-cutting landlord can collapse and kill you. The fumes from
your neighbour's I-better-pass-my-neighbour generating set can send you to the grave. A trigger-happy policeman
can shoot you because of N100 and blame it on accidental discharge. A million other silly happenings in this
country can take your life away. Living to be 70, therefore, is largely by the grace of God. Personally, I have been
tried for murder because I wrote an article that officialdom didn't like. The offence of murder carries a death penalty.
I have been tried, along with Dan Agbese and Yakubu Mohammed, for mutiny for publishing an interview that
officialdom didn't like. That offence carries a death penalty. In these two instances, God and the judiciary delivered
me from the jaws of the lion. So you can see why I owe DAME a lifetime of gratitude for this award.

Now let us interrogate ourselves. How did it happen that a Nigerian journalist, Jones Abiri, was in detention for two
years and we did not know or if we knew, we did not care until foreign journalists raised the issue during the IPI
conference in June? Was it absentmindedness, a cover-up, the failure of memory, the decline or death of
investigative journalism, the fear of officialdom or the assassination of our collective conscience? Whatever it was,
we bear the blame and the shame in full as professionals.

Now the campaigns are here and soon the elections will be at our door, will we do our duty to Nigeria by being fair,
fair, fair? The fairness doctrine in journalism is the ultimate doctrine, the philosopher's stone, the elixir, the cure all,
the miracle drug, the measuring rod, the sounding board for professional and ethical journalism practice. But
fairness comes with courage, not just knowledge. In the midst of temptations to be partisan, let your courage shine
through. I ask you to be fair because that is the highway, the paved path to a fair, progressive, just and egalitarian
society. Partisanship is not.


Load-Date: December 28, 2018


  
