

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 3
                                              Babangida's Age And Agenda [column]




                                  Babangida's Age And Agenda [column]
                                                             Leadership (Abuja)
                                                      August 21, 2010 Saturday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1351 words
Byline: Aniebo Nwamu

Body


At the peak of the June 12 struggle, in 1994, I was so despondent that I decided to approach an old and
experienced friend to seek advice.

I felt like quitting journalism because the job was no longer giving me happiness. My friend, a doctor who was then
in his late 50s, advised me to seek greener pastures overseas, if I could. The only viable business in Nigeria, he
told me, was government.

By that he meant that except you are in government - as a minister, governor, senator, president, commissioner or
even councillor - you won't be rich, especially if you are ethical. "If I were younger, I would have abandoned this
country for good. There is nothing left here, you know," he said. The only rich doctors, he added, were those who
were not observing the ethics of the profession. I agreed that it was the same in every profession: engineering, law,
nursing, teaching, journalism. If I had listened to my old friend, maybe I would have participated in the politics of the
Fourth Republic and could have been a senator or a governor today. But is it really true, as my friend said, that
there is nothing left in our country except public office and public funds?

General Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida has just proved him right. Here is a man who ruled this country for eight
years until 1993 but still wants to rule again at old age. I expected that, in the last 17 years he has been out of
power, he would have established farms, vehicle-making factories and several other manufacturing firms that would
employ millions of Nigerians. After all, that's the spirit of the Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) that his
government launched. What did he forget in Aso Rock that he wants to pick up? It was one of the questions we
asked him when he invited us to his Minna home last weekend. Truly, he had convincing answers to most
questions. Yes, he has bright ideas; but he couldn't convince me that he would perform better in old age than when
he was younger.

Although he celebrated his 69th birth anniversary on Tuesday, I put Babangida's age now at 75 or 76. I don't intend
to prove that he deliberately lied about his age. No. Many of his age mates simply adopted dates of birth. There was
no birth registry then and few parents were educated enough to read the calendar. Even many who belong to my
generation do not have birth certificates and have sworn affidavits claiming they are five years younger. When
former President Olusegun Obasanjo's first son Gbenga said his father was older than he claimed, everyone knew
he was telling the truth: likely, Obasanjo is now between 82 and 85, not 73.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 3
                                       Babangida's Age And Agenda [column]

I can support my guess at IBB's age with the stories he himself told us last week: By 1948, he and Abdulsalami
Abubakar (another ex-head of state) were plucking mangoes at the hilltop where their homes are now located. They
were being chased away by the colonial masters' dogs, and they swore that they would live there after their
retirement. Again, between 1948 and 1954, IBB was reading Tai Solarin's column, "Thinking with you" (in the Daily
Times). So, if one thinks with me, he will agree that IBB couldn't have been reading at the age of 6 or 7. Judging by
the age I started reading The Renaissance (formerly The Biafran Sun and later Daily Star), and believing that I
started school at an earlier age than he did, I presume IBB was at least 13 in 1948.

Now that Babangida wants to run for president, his opponents are sure to flaunt June 12, the Okigbo panel's report,
Dele Giwa etcetera to whittle down his supporters. But, are these really "ugly spots"? I have not been asked to
campaign for IBB but, apart from his age, I have little else against his ambition. For, if senility sets in and he is in
power, the ship of state is sure to drift - as it did under ailing Yar'Adua.

In my heart of hearts, I believe IBB had no hand in the murder of my senior colleague Giwa. Rather, I suspect some
overzealous security agents who might have done certain things without their bosses' knowledge. The security
agencies' inability to catch the murderers should be an ugly spot on the IBB administration and the subsequent
regimes. That is probably why many more Nigerians have been assassinated with impunity.

The Okigbo report did not say that IBB stole $12.4 billion. It said the Gulf oil windfall was not put in "regenerative
investments".

As to June 12, I can testify that the annulment of the June 12, 1993, presidential election was not Babangida's most
grievous offence as a military leader. As a journalist who has interviewed many important personalities in Nigeria
and abroad - not disregarding the several "off the record" encounters - I know that, in the quiet of their homes, many
Nigerians have given thanks to Oluwa for that annulment. I'm not one of them - no, I'm too enlightened to support
anti-democratic tendencies - but, one evening before June 23 of that year, I was in The Guardian newsroom when
one Omo-Oba said something like, "Yes, it's now time to deal with these Igbo people." All of us had been rejoicing
that Abiola had won when he uttered that rubbish, and, naturally, those of us that were Igbo withdrew into our
shells. What have Ndigbo done wrong? Their hard work and tenaciousness have brought them nothing but envy
and jealousy from little minds. When, therefore, the election was annulled and most of our Yoruba friends were
wearing mournful faces, you did not expect many Ndigbo to sincerely express sympathy with Omo-Oba who was
hoping to "deal with these Igbo people". And, during his campaigns, Abiola once carelessly said he could do without
Igbo people, perhaps prompting Arthur Nzeribe to start his Association for Better Nigeria project. The betrayal of
Ndigbo by their south-western compatriots during the civil war is still boldly written in history books. Even the young
ones who don't read have heard the story from their elderly relations. And the way Obasanjo treated the South-East
during his last eight years in power tells another story.

Nevertheless, the actual ugly spot on the military regime led by IBB is the way it managed the nation's economy.
When we reminded IBB of the belief that his regime institutionalised corruption in the country, he recounted how he
had challenged people to step forward and say they bribed him. He spoke of the cleanness of his ministers and how
nobody has been convicted of the crime. But he missed the point. It was probably the effects of the economic
reforms introduced by his government that made thieves out of many Nigerians. They had to steal in order to feed
their families. Corruption became a way of life: 419 boomed. Civil servants and everybody else who had access to
the treasury stole unchallenged. Truly, the situation has got worse since 1993. But the pervasiveness of corruption
in the country reached this height for the first time when IBB was in power. From then, also, criminals have not been
punished. Everything, like the economy, became practically liberalised!

During the Buhari/Idiagbon era, corrupt politicians of the Second Republic were locked up, put on trial, and were
being jailed when IBB staged his coup. Many thought he had come to execute the politicians but, instead, he set
them all free. The War Against Indiscipline (WAI) that had started working was neutralised and limited to a monthly
environmental sanitation. SAP, which really sapped the energies of Nigerians, happened because IBB relied on
textbook economists. Common sense should have told them that there are reforms you cannot implement in an
undeveloped country such as this. It's like globalisation being sold to us now. In a globalised world, what has
Nigeria got to offer? What do we export? Even the crude oil we have is being exploited by foreigners with imported

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 3
                                     Babangida's Age And Agenda [column]

machinery and equipment. We can't refine the fuel we consume, so it has to be imported. Indeed, IBB's government
experimented with the lives of Nigerians, and, since then, things have not been the same.

Will things change to the pre-1986 days if IBB returns as president? Maybe he has a different agenda this time, but
Nigeria now looks like a knocked engine.


Load-Date: August 23, 2010


  
