

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                         Democracy and Freedom of the Press [opinion]




                           Democracy and Freedom of the Press [opinion]
                                                             Daily Trust (Abuja)
                                                        May 10, 2011 Tuesday



Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 733 words

Body


Last Tuesday was marked as World Press Freedom Day. When the United Nations General Assembly declared
May 3 of every year to mark the day, the aim was not only to celebrate the importance of a free press to democracy
and economic development but also to honour those who die in the course of exercising this right.

This year's celebration coincided with the 20th anniversary of the Declaration of Windhoek - a statement of free
press principles put together by African newspaper journalists in the South African city in 1991. UNESCO usually
marks the day by conferring the UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize on an individual,
organisation, or institution that has made a remarkable contribution to either the defence or promotion of press
freedom, especially in the face of danger. The Prize, created in 1997, was named in honour of the Colombian
journalist Guillermo Cano Isaza who was murdered in 1986 in front of his newspaper office. The jailed Iranian
journalist, Ahmad Zeidabadi was named the winner of the year's prize.

The theme of this year's celebration, "21st Century Media - New Media, New Barriers" is apt. There is no doubt that
the social media-internet, mobile phones, and other social networking tools-have helped to advance the course of
press freedom by creating a community of 'citizen journalists' who are unencumbered by time, space, or even
resources.

In Nigeria for instance this new media genre has given rise to online outlets, most of them foreign-based, that often
go beyond the traditional bounds of mainstream media to expose incidents of bad governance and corruption in
high places.

The importance of the social media in promoting democracy and good governance in Africa was underlined during
this year's World Press Freedom Day when the Omidyar Network of Redwood City, California, announced the
award of nearly $5 million in funding to four media-related groups involved in investigative and citizen journalism in
developing countries-African Media Initiative (Kenya); the SaharaReporters project (Nigeria); Media Development
Loan Fund (U.S.), and the Committee to Protect Journalists (Africa programmes). Though the importance of the
new social media in advancing the frontiers of press freedom is obvious, the ability of many Nigerians living in
Nigeria to access them is however constrained by low internet penetration, poor access to computers, insufficient
training on the use of these new resources, poverty and poor pay and as well as other challenges often associated
with underdevelopment.

Just as the new social media have helped to advance the course of press freedom by enriching the marketplace of
ideas, they are also liable to abuse, especially by 'citizen journalists' who mistake press freedom for license to

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                                   Democracy and Freedom of the Press [opinion]

impugn the hard-earned reputation of others. There are several instances of blatant defamatory stories, rumours
and innuendos being presented as facts - often without the writer bothering to hear the other side of the story before
clicking on the 'send' button'. Therefore while new social media deserve passionate support, 'citizen journalists'
need to cultivate some healthy self-restraint and a code of responsible online journalism, especially on matters
involving national security and attack on people's reputation.

In Nigeria, this year's World Press Freedom Day is also an opportunity to remember those journalists who died in
the course of plying their trade, such as Dele Giwa of Newswatch, Godwin Agbroko and Abayomi Ogundeji of
ThisDay newspapers, Bayo Ohu of Guardian newspapers, Edo Ugbagwu of The Nation and Nathan Dubak and
Gyeng Bwede, both of Light Bearer newspapers of Jos, Plateau State. The government should step up efforts to
fish out the murderers of these journalists, and take measures that will offer a more protective environment for
press freedom to flourish. The World Press Freedom Day is equally an opportunity to call attention to the numerous
violations of the right to freedom of expression such as the use of threats of libel proceedings to chill speech or the
suppression of unfavourable reports in the media through influence peddling or buying up and destroying copies of
newspapers that run what those involved in these acts consider to be unfavourable stories. This calls to mind the
recent conducts of some senior government officials, which threaten free working environment for journalists.


Load-Date: May 17, 2011


  
