

                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 2
                                                   Omisore’s thoughtful thoughts




                                         Omisore’s thoughtful thoughts
                                                           The Sun (Nigeria)
                                                      November 7, 2014 Friday




Copyright 2014 The Sun Publishing Limited Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. (Syndigate.info) All Rights Reserved




Length: 785 words
Byline: Our Reporter

Body


T houghtful & Thoughtless Thoughts, a book written by Hon Ipoola Ahmed Omisore, a member of the Lagos State
House of Assembly, is a book based on his ‘thoughts’ on contemporary Nigerian issues and politics. It
encompasses an account of his stewardship, marital life lessons, Yoruba and family history, general tips and wise
sayings. The [...]

T houghtful & Thoughtless Thoughts, a book written by Hon Ipoola Ahmed Omisore, a member of the Lagos State
House of Assembly, is a book based on his ‘thoughts’ on contemporary Nigerian issues and politics. It
encompasses an account of his stewardship, marital life lessons, Yoruba and family history, general tips and wise
sayings.

The book contents are from his daily social media posts from 2010-2015. Divided in five sections and 14 chapters,
section 3 deals largely with marital life in the context of weakening family values arising primarily from marital crisis
in our society. We all know that that the institution of family and marriage are endangered these days.

The author dwells on the vagaries and challenges of marital life, family, love and sex. He place emphasis on home
building, the age-long rivalry between mothers and wives, the importance of love in marriage (in actual fact, he
encourages men not to give 100% love to their wives, suggesting 90% while the remaining 10% should be tied to
the success of the marriage), according to him sex is a strong aspect in marriage. Both chapters 7 and 8 advise that
a man needs patience to be a good husband, though I disagreed.

As a politician of the progressive circle, he eulogizes, with fanaticism, his leader and former governor of Lagos
State, Asiwaju Bola Ahmed Tinubu as a man with a lion’s heart who bestrides the country’s political space like a
colossus. To him, Tinubu is a master planner, a phenomenon and a generous personality.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                                            Omisore’s thoughtful thoughts

From pages 79-87, the author gives an account of his stewardship, including the empowerment of 350 women and
250 youths in Ojokoro, free pre-WASCE lectures, 200 free medicated eye glasses, free exercise books, one day
hounourable programme, youth football challenge and his visit to Lagos University Teaching Hospital (LUTH) to
settle the medical bill of a patient abandoned by his family and friends after an accident.

He also defends his membership of the House of Assembly at 66 with a biblical proclamation! Also, refers to an
incident that almost made him quit the social media when someone called him as a clown; but thank God, he kept
faith.

One very important aspect of this book is the author’s unwavering belief in the indivisibility of the country. He looks
at those issues troubling Nigeria as dashed hopes, religious folly, insurgency in the north, Islamic banking, failed
agendas, petroleum subsidy removal, the crave for private jets by Nigeria’s bigwigs, state of infrastructure, the rich
versus the masses, and graduate unemployment ( a time bomb).

He also offers workable solutions. Interestingly, he mentions the late Dele Giwa, the well-known journalist, killed
by a letter bomb in 1986, saying they both attended the same primary and secondary school. They completed their
secondary education in 1967 according to Omisore.

A whole section of the book (section 4) is devoted to Yoruba and Ile-Ife history. Omisore has his roots in Ile-Ife, and
he gives a picture of his family history dating back to his earliest progenitors. Readers are taken on historical
odyssey from the First Republic to the present. Chief Obafemi Awolowo, Chief Akintola, Sir adesoji Aderemi and
great Ile-Ife indigenes like Chief Ajani Anibijuwon Omisore (the author’s progenitor), Reverend Kayode (Femi Fani-
Kayode’s grandfather) Reverend Cole, R.A. Fani-Kayode, SAN, Chief Alex Duduyemi (former Paliamentary
secretary to Prime Minister Tafawa Balewa), Chief Ijiwoye, Chief Adeyera, Barrister Micheal Omisade are given
prominence in this chapter.

Chapter 13 is basically to celebrate the author’s immediate family, most especially his aged mother, wife and
children, while the last section (15) is devoted to general tips and wise sayings about life and development by great
political leaders, former presidents, the Bible and others. It is to serve as a guide for anyone aspiring to greater
heights.

On the whole, this is a good book. However, publication of feedback from his audience would have enriched the
book. One must commend Hon. Omisore, 66, and indeed a grandfather, for his consistent commitment in terms of
time and energy to social media for five years (2010-2014) and at odd hours (3am-6am). More importantly, he
deserves praise for bearing the insults associated with social media platforms. This book has shown the positive
side of social media.

Surulere, Lagos State.


Load-Date: November 7, 2014


  
