

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
     Review: Fiction: Out of the shadows: A passionate first novel that emerges victorious against all the odds:
                              Waiting for an Angel by Helon Habila 226pp, Hamish H....




 Review: Fiction: Out of the shadows: A passionate first novel that emerges
 victorious against all the odds: Waiting for an Angel by Helon Habila 226pp,
                         Hamish Hamilton, pounds 12.99
                                               The Guardian (London)
                                                  October 26, 2002



Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited

Section: Guardian Saturday Pages, Pg. 26
Length: 1109 words
Byline: Maya Jaggi

Body


 In Helon Habila's powerful first novel, the journalist and poet Lomba is warned by a colleague that, even if he
finishes the novel he is writing in longhand by candlelight in a Lagos slum, no one will publish it. "Here in this
country our dreams are never realised," says Lomba. "Someone always contrives to turn them into a nightmare."
Waiting for an Angel , written in similar circumstances and focused partly on the predicament of writers in a country
such as Nigeria, faced that oblivion. But the author self-published a section of it, which then won Britain's Caine
prize for African writing last year. He was taken on by a major literary agency in London, and his book sold to
Penguin's Simon Prosser, editor of Zadie Smith and WG Sebald.

 Few of Habila's Nigerian contemporaries can hope for such a break, inside or outside the country. At
independence in 1960, its literature was thriving, led by the father of the African novel in English, Chinua Achebe
(his 1958 Things Fall Apart is one of the most widely read novels of the 20th century), Wole Soyinka (the 1986
Nobel laureate) and Cyprian Ekwensi. British publishers thirsted for innovative writing from the former colonies.
Imprints such as Heinemann's African Writers Series (whose first 100 titles Achebe oversaw) had both a presence
in Africa and distribution in the west.

In the 1980s, economic downturn and rapacious military rule conspired to halt the boom in Nigeria. Successive
multinational publishers pulled out of the country as the naira plummeted, putting books out of the reach of an
already tiny readership. Nigerian publishing houses dwindled, their interests largely confined to textbooks, vanity
memoirs (as of army top-brass) and romantic pulp, exemplified by a Mills-and-Boon type outfit known to Lagos
wags as "Thrills and Boom". Writers such as Habila have resorted to paying what are essentially printers, where
both quality control and distribution are non-existent. Meanwhile, though foreign publishers have embraced Nigerian
writers living abroad, notably the Booker Prize-winner Ben Okri, their active curiosity about those in Nigeria has
clearly waned.

 Judging by Habila's sombre, gripping and at times humorous novel, this is a pity. Cleverly constructed in seven
parts, it deftly moves back in time from a period after military rule has ended. The linchpin, Lomba, "slim, of average

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
     Review: Fiction: Out of the shadows: A passionate first novel that emerges victorious against all the odds:
                              Waiting for an Angel by Helon Habila 226pp, Hamish H....

height and inquisitive of gaze", is first encountered through prison diaries that echo Soyinka's classic memoir of the
1960s, The Man Died

 Though the circumstances of Lomba's political detention become clear only towards the end, he gradually emerges
as a college drop-out whose best friend went mad as the army clamped down on student protests. His great love
married a rich man to pay for her mother's cancer treatment. Forced to put aside his novel, he wrote on arts and
culture for a magazine, but was informed by its editor that "everything is political". As their offices were destroyed in
an arson attack for accusing the military dictator of squandering millions, the editor faced arrest or exile.

 Among other characters in Lomba's Lagos neighbourhood of "Poverty Street" are Kela, a 15-year-old boy packed
off to an aunt in Lagos for smoking dope in his father's car; Kela's teacher, Joshua, in love with a former pupil
turned prostitute, and inspirational leader of residents' protests; Nancy, a young single mother who finds release in
covering the walls with graffiti; and Kela's Auntie Rachel, owner of Godwill food centre, whose husband died fighting
the Biafrans in the civil war, and whose second suitor was burnt to death as a suspected "northerner" during riots
sparked by the annulling of presidential elections in 1993.

 Auntie Rachel, a drinker, "dreamt backwards, groping back to a time dissolved, to figures blurred in the astigmatic
lens of history". The novel's own hallucinatory reeling back in time slowly reveals how these characters are linked,
culminating in a fatal demonstration that Lomba has been assigned to cover, but which is brutally quashed.

 Fiction and historical fact are intertwined (a character named Helon Habila appears briefly at a literary gathering
raided by "sojas"). Incidents during the corrupt military regime of General Ibrahim Babangida and the even greater
terror of Sani Abacha are taken out of sequence: Babangida's annulling of the elections and imprison ment of the
apparent victor, Moshood Abiola; the coup that brought Abacha to power; the hanging of the writer Ken Saro-Wiwa;
the killing by letter bomb of the journalist Dele Giwa; and the assassination of Abiola's widow, Kudirat. "The bodies
keep piling up." The author describes the feeling of "living with guns to our heads" in an afterword - often a
questionable device in fiction, yet perhaps justified for a non-Nigerian readership.

 In realist vein, the novel's artistry is manifest in the mordant strength and clarity of its language, and its compelling
structure. Though the strands are satisfyingly gathered up, each section resembles a short story. In the first, Lomba
is inveigled by a prison superintendent, with the promise of books and writing materials, into penning love poems to
a schoolteacher the crude officer wishes to woo. But allusions and clues he drops into the poems (in one case
plagiarising Sappho), reveal his identity to her. Other episodes are set in a Lagos of curfews and interminable petrol
queues, where thieves are set alight, and women make firewood by hacking up wooden billboards advertising
condoms - a hint that warnings about Aids are still going unheeded.

 The power of literature, and writing under repression, are implicit themes. Lomba, taken to visit the old slave port of
Badagry on the Atlantic coast, recoils at the "gewgaws of slavery", which include the mouth lock. "Every oppressor
knows that wherever one word is joined to another, there'll be revolt."

 The title refers to a man in a Lagos bar defying the curfew after martial music on the radio has signalled a coup, in
effect awaiting his own death. It could equally suggest the writer, and his society, waiting for salvation. There are
several layers of irony in a woman's cynical advice to Lomba: "You must try and get arrested - that's the quickest
way to make it as a poet. You'll have no problem with visas after that, you might even get an international award."
While it would be heartening to see this novel as a harbinger of a literary renaissance, as things stand we are left
wondering what other sparkling manuscripts might be left behind in the dust.

To order Waiting for an Angel for pounds 10.99 plus p&p call the Guardian book service on 0870 066 7979.


Load-Date: October 26, 2002


  
