

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                                                How Secure is the Nation? [analysis]




                                    How Secure is the Nation? [analysis]
                                                             This Day (Lagos)
                                                      October 10, 2010 Sunday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 2643 words
Byline: Kingsley Nwezeh

Body


Nigerians and indeed residents of the Federal Capital Territory, woke up on October 1, still basking in the euphoria
of the nation's 50th independence anniversary celebrations that was unfolding. Many residents had no premonition
that they would be confronted with two deadly bomb blasts that would kill 12 people including civilians and security
operatives even as several people were also injured.

This unprecedented terrorist attack took place 500 meters away from the Eagle Square venue of the independence
celebrations, where more than 15 heads of government and representatives of other world leaders were seated.
President Goodluck Jonathan and his deputy, Namadi Sambo, as well as other top government functionaries were
also in attendance.

The questions on everybody's lips have been: who masterminded this dastardly act against Nigeria on the very day
it celebrated 50 years of nationhood? Why would anybody detonate bombs on Shehu Shagari Way, a route passed
that morning by even foreign leaders who came to celebrate with Nigeria? Was it politically motivated? Was it a
terrorist attack? Why now, some months to the 2011 general elections. Are there people in the presidential race
with bombing antecedents that we need to watch out for? What were the security agencies doing? Questions,
questions and questions.

Outraged by the killing of innocent Nigerians, President Goodluck Jonathan described the developmet as "a low,
wicked and dastardly act of desperation by criminals and murderers who do not wish Nigeria well".

The explosions, which appeared to have been planted in a parked car tore to shreds about 26 vehicles parked
opposite the Ministry of Justice on Shehu Shagari Way. The incident occurred between 11:15am and 12: 24pm
killing about 12 people on the spot while some of the victims died in the hospitals.

"These bomb attacks are the worst anniversary gifts any nation can get," so declared Jonathan. Describing the
incident as "sad and unfortunate", Jonathan said the purpose was to ensure that the celebration going on at the
nearby Eagle Square was cancelled by all means.

A statement issued by presidential spokesman, Ima Niboro, expressed President Jonathan's grief and sympathy
with the families of the victims of the blast, saying, "The president shares their consternation and understands their
confoundment, as they mourn while the nation celebrates".

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 5
                                          How Secure is the Nation? [analysis]

"The president wants these families to know that their loved ones have not died in vain. Rather they have paid the
supreme price for our unity; and in their death, they have watered the tree of our freedom," he added.

The government assured that those behind the "vicious acts" would be found and would "pay dearly for this heinous
crime". Speaking to journalists at the scene of the blasts which was littered with automobile parts, clothes worn by
the victims, sandals, slippers, shoes, human parts, blood and other shrapnels, the Minister of Police Affairs, Alhaji
Maina Waziri, said eight persons were confirmed dead and described the incident as an act of terrorism.

"I want to begin by thanking the Almighty for this 50th anniversary and also express my profound unhappiness with
this incident that is a blight on this momentous day for all Nigerians but in this time of adversity, it is desirable of all
Nigerians on this very good day to pray that these irritations that occur in this country is indeed brought to an end.

"The information I have is that there were two explosions which we can say the first explosion apparently planted in
a taxi where the bomb exploded. Initial report indicate that there were no casualties, then there was another
explosion within the space of ten minutes and that hurt a couple of citizens both members of the uniform cadre and
civilians. The resultant effect is that about eight people are confirmed dead and 18 are injured. The casualty of both
dead and the injured involve both members of the police and other security agencies as well as very innocent
Nigerians," he said.

The minister further said: "I will also plead with them not to blow it out of proportion and allow the security agencies
time to conduct their investigations. They should not be put under siege. They should be allowed to display the
expertise for which government had spent a lot of money".

According to him, "I have done what I consider the non security interaction with members of the press. You will
allow them to do their job. However, bomb blast is not a tea party, it is an act of terrorism".

Prior to the blasts, a group which claimed to be the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta Region
(MEND) had issued an alert warning members of the public to avoid parked cars and dustbins. Immediately after
the bombings, the same organisation said the high casualty figure should be blamed on the security agencies for
failing to carry out their constitutional roles even after it had warned of the impending bomb blasts. This obviously
raised the issue of preparedness of the nation's security network.

The first bomb, which had detonated at about 11: 15 am did not record any casualty. Probably because of Nigeria's
lack of experience in managing crisis situations such as bomb blasts, stunned passers-by and security operatives
massed around the site of the first blast when the second one exploded killing more than 12 persons.

There were also conflicting reports about another bomb which was poorly detonated inside the Eagle Square while
some claimed it was accidental discharge which allegedly felled two mobile policemen. But the police said there
was no such explosion inside the Eagle Square.

After the incident, the South African authorities promptly arrested Henry Okah, an alleged leader of the group. He
had previously been questioned by the South African police and has since appeared in a South African court in
connection with the bomb blasts.

Did the nation's security agencies receive intelligence alert before the twin bombings? If they did, what did they do
with it? At a news conference in Abuja, Assistant Director, Public Relations of the State Security Service (SSS),
Marilyn Ogar, did confirm that the service received intelligence information before the blast.

According to her, the bombing was planned for Wednesday September 29, 2010 but was foiled as soon as the
information was received during the early hours of September 28. The overriding objective of the group, she said,
was to scare foreign visitors from attending the 50th anniversary celebration.

According to her, about 0130 hours on Tuesday, September 28, information was received that the three arms zone
(Presidential Villa, National Assembly and the Supreme Court) was to be bombed and six vehicles had already
being prepared for the purpose. At this point, she said, the service contacted the military which provided three

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                                        How Secure is the Nation? [analysis]

towing trucks which were added to that of the service thus kick-starting a joint operation. During the joint operation,
a total of nine abandoned vehicles were towed away.

"Of these, two were near the SSS headquarters, two facing the villa gate and the National Assembly and two close
to police headquarters while one was stationed at the Eagle Square and two at the Apo Legislative Quarters. They
were all towed away", she said.

Following the development, the Federal Road Safety Commission (FRSC) and the Vehicle Inspection Office (VIO)
were co-opted into the operations to move around the capital towing away abandoned vehicles. The measure, she
said, lasted till the morning of October 1, during which 65 abandoned vehicles were removed.

"It is worthy of note that out of the seven vehicles removed from the three arms zone, four are yet to be collected",
she said.

According to her, when the plan A failed, they resorted to the penetration of the Eagle Square in an attempt to plant
explosive devices but was countered by hi-tech equipment in and around the Eagle Square which jammed the
detonation of any such explosives.

On October 1, she said, Eagle Square and surrounding areas were cordorned off and appropriate measures put in
place while joint efforts by the security agencies were put in place.

"However, the rain showers of that morning provided the leeway for double parking by motorists. In the process, the
perpetrators apparently gained access to park on the road side as well," she said.

"We got the information. After the 9/11 incidents in the US, it dawned on all nations that no singular nation can go it
alone when it comes to security issue so there was enhanced collaboration with each nation so we share
intelligence and information at that level so definitely we had advanced information that Nigeria was going to come
under some form of attack.

"After the 9/11 terrorist bombings in the United States, we share intelligence. Intelligence is no longer the exclusive
preserve of any nation. If you assess other people's country and you keep quiet when it is about to affect your
country, the other people who have such information will keep quiet. We share intelligence with other foreign
nationals concerning our own internal security", she said.

The issue of inter-agency collaboration was also an issue in carrying out investigations by security agencies.
Recently, President Jonathan berated security agencies for running parallel investigations and making claims of
superiority against each other.

"Our security agencies need to work in harmony to craft effective strategies for containing these challenges.
Unfortunately, the glaring disconnect and lack of synergy as well as claims and counter claims over superiority
among security agencies have diminished the effectiveness of government's efforts towards combating crime in the
society", he said.

The lack of synergy between the security agencies also played out with the Police declaring two suspects wanted
while the State Security Service (SSS) said it arrested nine suspects in connection with the incident whom it said
had direct links with Henry Okah and other prominent Nigerians.

The SSS spokesperson had said in response to a question raised on the issue of collaboration that: "our mode of
investigation is totally different from that of the police. Like I said, I would not know whether the two suspects the
police is declaring wanted are on our list. With the ongoing investigations, I might not want to reveal the status of
the suspects in our custody".

As expected, Henry Okah's claims in an interview with Al-Jazeera Television that a presidential aide called him to
implicate northern politicians in the bomb blasts has generated a lot of controversy.

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 5
                                        How Secure is the Nation? [analysis]

"On Saturday morning, just a day after the attack, a very close associate of President Jonathan called me and
explained to me that there had been a bombing in Nigeria and that President Jonathan wanted me to reach out to
the group, MEND and get them to retract the earlier statement they had issued claiming the attacks.

"They wanted me to blame the attack on Northerners who are trying to fight against him to come back as president
and if this was done, I was not going to have any problems with South African government. I declined to do this and
a few hours later, I was arrested. It was based on their belief that I was going to do that that Jonathan issued a
statement that MEND did not carry out the attack", he said.

Okah's claim instantly triggered a bedlam. Other presidential aspirants accused government of complicity while the
Northern Political Leaders Forum went one notch further by calling on President Jonathan to resign or be
impeached.

The president instantly described the claims as outright lies and asked Okah to name the official that spoke to him
and further described his action as that of a "drowning man determined to pull others down with him".

A joint statement signed by the campaign groups of of Former Vice President Atiku Abubakar, Aliyu Gusau and
Bukola Saraki, all presidential aspirants, said Okah's allegations were weighty and sobering and if true, required
independent judicial investigation. They expressed dismay with the manner government was handling issues of
national security and the respect of the rights of law abiding citizens.

As the fireworks continued, Director General of the Ibrahim Babangida Campaign Organisation, Dr. Raymond
Dokpesi, was arrested by the SSS in connection with the bomb blasts. The SSS claimed that it established
exchange of two text messages between the suspects in its custody and Dokpesi, one claiming to have asked them
to come and collect the "balance" of an unspecified amount while the second asked them to come for a meeting at
the IBB campaign office.

The IBB campaign organisation also condemned the arrest and described the trend "as the growing politics of
intolerance, intimidation, coercion, persecution and harassment". Dokpesi has since been released and is expected
to report back to the SSS.

Accusing fingers were also pointed at former military President, Ibrahim Babangida, who is also in the presidential
race apparently on the grounds that the first case of bomb explosion, parcel bomb, that killed renowned journalist,
Dele Giwa, took place under his watch as military leader.

He said "it will be idiotic for anyone to link me to that bomb blast because I know what the unity of this country
means and that was why we fought to keep it together. So why should I get involved in such a mess?

"Naturally, when things like this happen, people will cast their imaginative and fertile minds into action and as we all
know, Nigerians have very fertile minds but this is the price we pay for the love of our country and as politicians."

The former military president, who spoke in Minna, blamed the bomb blasts on lapses on the part of securitymen,
adding that the security forces were given prior notice before the disaster yet nothing was done to avert the
situation.

True to character, Nigerian politicians especially the presidential aspirants had maximally exploited the situation by
making huge political capital out of a national tragedy. The Adamu Ciroma led-Northern Elders' position on the
matter had been roundly condemned as hasty and capable of inflaming passions as the natural position would have
been to call for an inquiry instead of calling for the resignation or impeachment of the President.

President Jonathan has also reiterated his administration's resolve to get to the route of the matter and called the
bluff of those using blackmail tactics to intimidate his government. "Blackmail and intimidation will not stop the
Federal Government from doing the right thing. Whoever is found culpable will face the full weight of the law. We
would be failing the past, present and future generations of Nigerians if we do not get to the root of this dastardly
act and seek justice the way it should be done in a civilised society such as ours," the president said.

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 5
                                       How Secure is the Nation? [analysis]

He said further: "Dear friends, if the aim of the attackers is to create a sense of insecurity and panic across the
nation in order to advance their narrow interests, Nigerians will stand up to them and make it clear that they cannot
be intimidated."

From all indications, there is the need for caution by all parties to this debacle. The situation has also called to
question the refusal by government to equip security agencies with the state- of- the- art technology as regards
bombings and kidnappings.

When will Nigeria embrace forensic investigation? When will the Police bomb detection and disposal units be
adequately equipped to work efficiently and effectively? When will CCTVs be installed in the nation's capital like
other parts of the world? When will security agencies work in harmony and act fast on intelligence reports and most
importantly, when will Nigerian politicians stop playing politics with the lives of innocent Nigerians? These are the
questions begging for answers from the political class in and out of government.


Load-Date: October 11, 2010


  
