

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                                                'Writer's block is an illusion'




                                           'Writer's block is an illusion'
                                                   The Nation (Nigeria)
                                                January 21, 2017 Saturday



Copyright 2017 The Nation All Rights Reserved

Length: 2360 words

Body


In continuation of his nation-wide tour and public reading of his prose fiction, My Name is Okoro, basically focusing
on the place of the minorities of the South-South during the Nigerian civil war of 1967 1970, Mr Sam Omatseye,
chairman of the editorial board of The Nation Newspapers, was at the Obafemi Awolowo University, (OAU), Ile Ife,
Osun State last week, where he used the opportunity to tackle myriad of burning national issues raised by the book
and other attendant exigencies of nationhood. Edozie Udeze was there The popularity and the high sense of
craftsmanship and witticism embedded in Mr Sam Omatseye's My Name is Okoro has continued to spread and
raise more topical issues and points of conversation on the problems of the nation-state.

 And as an author, he has consistently emphasized the fact that the story of My Name is Okoro emanated because
he wanted to establish the voices of the minorities of Southern Nigeria who were not only traumatized by the
pogrom of the 1960s, but were equally adversely affected by the civil war itself (1967 1970). Last week at the
Obafemi Awolowo University (OAU), Ile-Ife, Osun State, where the department of English facilitated the reading of
his book, Omatseye read an emotionally-suffused portion where Okey, one of the minor characters displayed one of
those rare but inevitable gallantry and courage that often trailed some of the scenes that took place before the
advent of the war proper The story places Udeze, Fidelis, Okoro, Okey and his mother squarely in the scene that
lead to more happenings which expose the role of some of the major characters in the novel.

Fidelis said: "I was with Okey when they came that night. We were playing Ludo game in their parlour Suddenly
Udeze ran into the house and said they are coming in Igbo language.

" Consequently, Okey brought out his gun and the game of the survival of the fittest began. This is the portion of the
book where the author craftily re-establishes contact between Okoro and the circumstances surrounding the escape
of some of his in-laws from the obnoxious scene of the pogrom in the North.

 This is necessary because Okoro's wife, Nneka, is Udeze's sister and Okey who volunteers to defend the family
finally pays with his life, while Udeze escapes with their mother to the East. In another section, Omatseye drew
attention to the drama between some returnee Biafrans and the soldiers at the head bridge, Asaba Deliberately
done, it was to show the level of frenzy displayed by those who went home to prepare for a new Republic and how
it took its toll on the people.

 Thereafter, he teased the audience with the birth of Udeze and how he was nicknamed Omalicha to show how
hairy and handsome he was at birth. For Omatsye, the occasion of the reading was like a child coming back home
after many years of sojourning outside the shores of his land.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 5
                                              'Writer's block is an illusion'

 OAU being his Alma matter, Omatseye was not only filled with that unbridled spirit of nostalgia, the students and
their teachers were very much eager to welcome him as Omoluabi (the child who returned). And so the atmosphere
became electrifying, exciting and rewarding as the students pelted him with questions on the issues of the war, the
reasons for the novel, whether the undercurrents that necessitated the call for Biafra in 1966 and more still persist
today.

 In his usual characteristic artistic style and brilliant sense of presentation, Omatseye, chairman of the editorial
board of The Nation newspapers and a multiple award winning columnist, said, "Yes, what inspired My Name is
Okoro Interestingly a number of things inspired it. I said I read the book by General Alabi Isama That was the
immediate tonic.

 I have also read other books on the civil war But I discovered that the minority narrative and perspective was not
prominent. So that was why I decided to do it.

You people stated pertinently in your question that I didn't mention the Ijaws and others. Yes, I didn't set out to
write about the Ijaws, but to write about the minorities.

I wrote about the Urhobos and the Itsekiri's and the Mid-West where I was conversant with. So, I used them as
metaphor, even though I have some characters which are minor from the other side.

" Even though as an author, a well-grounded novelist, poet and playwright Omatseye's primary intention was to
ensure that the story fulfilled its mission. He went on to say, "I wanted the conversation to be a bit more broad-
based so that people wouldn't say it is one-sided.

 There are plenty of Igbo characters in the book who also belonged to Biafra Even Okoro himself spent more time in
Biafra And that in itself was a way of also trying to elucidate the idea that the minority even suffered within Biafra He
(Okoro) was true Igbo when he was in the North and when he came to Biafra in Igboland, he was not Igbo enough.
So, that is the character and the kind of dilemma I wanted to create in the novel.

" He reiterated that his story is not just on the Urhobos and the Itsekiris, it is about the Nigerian crisis, that has
refused to ebb or peter out. "If you read the book" Omatseye explained, "you will notice that most of the characters
are Igbos.

 My most interesting character was a man named Chukwu who was killed by Udeze. And the next interesting
character for me was Nkechi, the girl who confronted the Hausa soldier, Abdullahi She ended up committing
suicide.

 However, I have another work that was set in the North. Not all my works were set either in the South-South or in
the South-East", he said.

 As a writer who does not have literary fixation or limitation or boundary, Omatseye's literary world-view is often very
encompassing, wide and far-flung. His spectrum of knowledge in his works goes beyond his immediate clime and
clan.

 He noted therefore that, "I wish I have that kind of ambiguity as well. But there's nothing wrong if I want to write
only Urhobo stories.

 For me, that is fine, but that's not the case Then to the question of when will Nigeria ever going to learn from
history I don't know whether human beings are stupid but at least they tend to act stupid. That's what we are.

We have not learnt from history because we have never asked any question. In my latest poetry collection here,
Scented Offal, I attempted the narration of the Nigerian history up to the civil war (1967 1970).

 The issue of Nigeria whether it is ethnic, whether it is the economy, whether it is inter-ethnic crisis, whether it is
education or the issue of North or South or even the issue of the civil war, we have never resolved any issue. And if
you have never resolved any issue it will never go away.

                                                                                                          Page 3 of 5
                                              'Writer's block is an illusion'

" The students were deeply worried too that the lopsidedness of the Nigerian setting is not helping for concerted
progress. Omatseye however, continued with his antidote on how to safeguard the society today for the progress of
tomorrow.

 "The cracks are still there and that is why we have not resolved any problem And that is why we keep rigmarolling
and have not learnt from history. And history will never come to an end.

 The issue of ethnic crisis, ethnic suspicion, will never come to an end. The civil war itself, the issues that started
the civil war are even more prominent today than when the civil war erupted in 1967.

 Whether in the past or now the reasons for Biafra were and are still justifiable. Government should engage
agitators in a dialogue, whether in the Niger Delta, South-East or somewhere else.

 Dialogue is the answer So, we have not resolved the issue and therefore we cannot talk of solution. The questions
are already there.

 Nigeria is about a question. When I was in the US, somebody asked me the question on why Nigeria is
underdeveloped why since independence, we have not really developed? Well I said that in 1960, Nigeria was a
country of great potentials.

 At that time it was 2004 2005 when I was attending a symposium Then I said Nigeria is still a country of great
potentials. So that is that" Omatseye nonetheless, counseled those who wanted to become writers or reporters but
have the fear of the unknown lurking in their hearts to pick the necessary courage to be what they want to be in life.

He reasoned thus. "I also had that problem being a journalist.

 But once you have a dream, don't let anybody stop you. In fact, the problem with most of us as human beings is
that we forget what we really want to do or become.

 And we want other people to decide for us what we want to do whether they are our parents, our wives, husbands
or children, they want to tell us what to do whereas your body is aching to go for something else. So, you better
follow your dream do what your body tells you to do because it will give you more psychological fulfillment and job
satisfaction.

 You are happy and healthier when you do what your mind tells you to do. If you have to die like Dele Giwa, it is
better to be happy and die like Dele Giwa than to live a thousand years, aching and dreaming.

 When I was here at OAU, my heart used to be in Literature even though my major was History. One of my
classmates used to tease me thus: 'Sam Omatseye, the eminent literary scholar in the wrong department.

' Then when I left school, I discovered I was still being fascinated with literature". Basically an interface between the
students and the author, Omatseye could not also fail to ginger them on on how to persevere and begin on time to
show which direction they are headed in life.

"Yes, I don't really believe in a writer's block. I think Achebe said that once.

 For me, I write every week and I have not failed to do so in more than ten years of The Nation. I have written my
column on Monday from different places in the world.

Just sit down and write. If you are a writer, then write.

Inspiration is often an excuse. Go and write you have no reason not to, if you want to write.

 If you have the discipline, you won't give any excuse not to write or being worried about a writer's block. So there's
nothing like writer's block it is individual block", he said grinning and causing endlessly ripples in the audience.

                                                                                                          Page 4 of 5
                                                 'Writer's block is an illusion'

 With the Auditorium II of the Faculty of Arts, venue of the programme packed to capacity, the students were highly
elated to see a product of their school who has attained an enviable height not just as a writer, but as a multiple
award winning journalist, well-respected all over the world. Present also were some top academics of the faculty.

They included the Dean of the Faculty of Arts, Professor Gbemisola Adeoti, the head of the Department of English,
Professor Adeniyi Okunoye. Others were Professor Wale Adegbite, Professor Chima Anyadike and Dr Chijioke
Uwasomba who handled the question and answer session of the programme.

 Uwasomba described the session as an opportunity to see to the success of this show "which is not only good, but
for us to engage Sam who has done a good job here." For Anyadike who taught Omatseye, the author has matured
over time and he is still young to produce more books for the good of mankind as time goes on.

 He said, "Even though Sam read History, his mind was always in Literature. He was a special student, fond of
engaging both his teachers and fellow students in dialogue, discussions and conversations.

 He was good at interrogating knowledge. This was what he was best known for and today he has turned out to be
a pride to humanity.

" He charged the students to always remember that it is what they put in today that they will reap tomorrow. For
Adeoti who was a journalist before, this was the best time to shower encomium on Omatseye not only as an
author but as someone who has dared where others feared to thread.

 "He is a brave professional. But as for you students you should endeavour to take from this knowledge as much as
you can.

" Short of describing Omatseye as an eagle on the Iroko he teased them that "by the time you are through with this,
your life will never be the same again. This is why he has come back home from Lagos to share from his fountain of
knowledge with us all.

" Adegbite who tried to circumvent some aspects of the show which the student anchors had already posited to be
a symposium, explained that English is the language of communication and therefore has to be taken seriously not
just by the students alone, by others who tease and taunt them that after all they merely teach English. "What is in
English?, they often taunt us," Adegbite averred.

 "But they forget that when we go into the ingredients of linguistics, we also encounter some professional jargons
like they do. Please keep encouraging one another to keep the language ever high and great," he implored them
The students who were in very high spirits were made to perform different portions of their poetry renditions.

 Their themes dwelt mainly on justice, fairness, love, reincarnation, freedom, change, redemption and more. "Don't
look down on me," one of the lines intoned.

"You know nothing of my pain. You made us a caravan of slaves.

 I need freedom from corruption as I hear that small voice, speaking, saying, redemption. Redemption is what I
need.

 Redemption is the answer" In response to all these Omatseye reminisces of his old days at OAU immediately
came to the fore. "I must say that as I stand here now I feel a little bit eerie.

 The last time I was here in this hall, I was in the hall there like you students. I never knew I'd one day stand at this
side addressing people on the other side, more so students.

Therefore, I feel a bit weird about this. Mrs.

 Bisi Anyadike sitting over there, we were students together And at the department of Literature in English, where I
took my electives I was more involved in literary works than I was in History, my major It feels real, real good that I'd

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 5
                                          'Writer's block is an illusion'

be here not to discuss a book of History but fiction. And one of the things I will never forget about Professor
Anyadike was his infinite capacity to seamlessly simplify a text in one sentence.

" The outing was obviously the most hilarious gathering recorded by My Name is Okoro. It shows how topical and
punchy the theme and storyline symbolize for Nigeria, particularly now that Nigeria needs more conversation and
dialogue to survive.


Load-Date: January 23, 2017


  
