

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                                  2011 - Anti Babangida Coalition Sets to Mobilise Opposition




               2011 - Anti Babangida Coalition Sets to Mobilise Opposition
                                                             Leadership (Abuja)
                                                      October 19, 2010 Tuesday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 356 words
Byline: Kazeem Akintunde
Dateline: Lagos

Body


A new group, the Anti- Babangida Coalition, (ABC), is set to begin house to house campaign, aimed at preventing
the former military president, General Ibrahim Babangida from coming back to power next year.

The group under the leadership of Mr Sina Odugbemi said in Lagos yesterday that they are ready to die in their bid
to stop Babangida from realising his objective of returning to power again.

Mr. Odugbemi who spoke at a press conference described Babangida's desire to rule the nation again as an insult
on our collective integrity as a nation.

"This sacrilege and odious affront on our integrity must be frontally confronted on all fronts by all the people who
wish Nigeria well in her cautious steps towards enduring democratic rule,".

He described Babangida as a virus that must be prevented before another serial damage is inflicted on the nation.

Mr. Odugbemi said the group will soon move to the North to sensitise the people on the need not to allow
Babangida back in power adding, "this campaign will be total, national and global with rallies and enlightenment
programmes to educate the citizens on the evils and the real dangers of another IBB virus in the nation's body
polity."

He said the former military president while in power surrendered the economy of the country to the dictates of the
International Monetary Fund, IMF, and the World Bank through his Structural Adjustment Programme Odugbemi
said that SAP led to the closure of many industries as well as the attendant loss of jobs which eventually led to the
wiping out of the middle class in the country. "Under his regime, corruption became institutionalised; he deodorised
and liberalised corruption to make it most attractive through the settlement syndrome, while he also criminally
annulled the June 12, 1993 presidential election."

Mr. Odugbemi said Babangida squandered the nation's wealth and was also responsible for the murder of Dele
Giwa, journalist and founding editor-in-chief of Newswatch Magazine.

He warned the Peoples Democratic Party, PDP, not to have anything to do with the former ruler adding that he
would be a bad product to sell to most Nigerians.

                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
                         2011 - Anti Babangida Coalition Sets to Mobilise Opposition


Load-Date: October 19, 2010


  
