

                                                                                                                     Page 1 of 4
                                              Reviewing parallax view of heroism




                                   Reviewing parallax view of heroism
                                                          The Guardian
                                                    August 27, 2023 Sunday



Copyright 2023 GUARDIAN Newspapers Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 1418 words
Byline: Nsikak Ekanem

Body


This piece which may be viewed as a review of Ray Ekpu’s column in Newswatch edition of November 2, 1987, got
inspiration from separate actions recently taken by two group of persons that tend to refute thematic message
conveyed in that column. They are Ukanafun Professionals’ Association, otherwise called UK-Pro, and Uyo Book
Club.

Peopled by few indigenes of Ukanafun local council residing in some Nigerian cities and in the Diaspora, the Uk-Pro
is making quest through advocacy and socio-cultural orientation for commensurate, comprehensive and sustainable
development of Ukanafun community, where Ekpu hails from. Founded by Udeme Nana, a Mass Communication
scholar with passionate drive for advancement of intellectualism, Uyo Book Club is on speedy drive to rejuvenate
reading culture, which is dangerously speeding on reverse gear.

On August 6, Uyo Book Club put together a “special reading session” in honour of Ekpu, whose birthday
anniversary was due that Sunday. The modest gathering was intellectually stimulating and socially hilarious.

Almost everyone in the Shakespeare Room at Watbridge hotel where the event took place took pride in having
certain unique identification with Ekpu. This writer, who was accorded a privilege to read some excerpts of Ekpu’s
published works, got a marked recognition not because of doing anything spectacular but only on account of being
the only person at the event that attended one of the two primary schools that Ekpu passed through – Qua Iboe
Church Group School Ikot Akpa Idem in present day Ukanafun.

Given the fact that he has not appeared in his weekly column in The Guardian, Daily Independent and Daily Sun in
recent time, what probably would have been Ekpu’s take on the trending issue of “let the poor breathe” has been
missed at the moment. But as timelessness, if not prophetic, as the works of every creative and inspirational writer
remain, Ekpu’s position resurfaced that Sunday and gave a soothing balm to readers who have been flipping pages
and searching website of newspapers for his view on how those who are rich through political offices think of the
“poor” who have been the worst hit from pangs of anti-people policies and the prodding of those in power.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 4
                                         Reviewing parallax view of heroism

“Nigeria’s New Religion” in Newswatch issue of November 16, 1987, which I read some portions not unconsciously,
dwelt on the plan by the Ibrahim Babangida-led federal government “to jack up the prices” of petroleum products
through subsidy removal.

The column’s currency remains intact: “As the cost of these services go up, so as the frustration of lower income
Nigerians, a. k. a. the poor. The poor, regrettably, have been at the receiving end of ministerial jokes. Poor bashing
has, in recent times, become the favourite pastime of some ministers who have, in the public profile and
statements, managed to exhibit suffocating arrogance of colonial administrators by putting their ministerial feet in
their ministerial mouths.”

He added that government “is about the welfare of the people, rich and poor alike.” Asserting that the poor and the
weak constitute Nigeria’s largest population, Ekpu sermonised that “it is more of the poor and the weak that any
sensitive government ought to cater for, since the rich and the powerful can adequately cater for themselves.” The
column concluded: “if nothing can be done to reduce the present suffering of Nigerians, nothing should be done to
accentuate it.”

While Uyo Book Club has had a very successful outing, the UK-Pro chaired by Prince Ekong Udom, which, early
this year, mooted an idea of commemorating Ekpu’s 50 years in journalism with a colloquium on the place of our
villages in the global village, has started moving the plan from drawing board to its proposed site. By the time the
UK-Pro’s initiative comes into full implementation, it would add impetus to that of Uyo Book Club and other
organizations and persons in refuting, to some degree, Ekpu’s column of November 2, 1987, which had the
headline, “Parallax view of Heroism.”

Although Parallax view of Heroism appeared to be in remembrance of Dele Giwa, Ekpu’s friend and first Editor-in-
Chief of Newswatch, whose column, Parallax Snap, was suddenly restricted to achieve following his assassination
on October 19, 1986, the piece was bemoaning African nations’ attitude of “the proverbial cow that does not value
her tail until she loses it.” Ekpu mentioned Thomas Sankara, whom he said was “manifestly honest and manifestly
committed to the liberation of the black person”, Obafemi Awolowo, whose “political sagacity and economic
pragmatism were virtually lost to most Nigerians while he lived” as well as Samora Machel, first President of
Mozambique.

In the category of living legend then that the Nigerian society did not consider worth of honouring, Ekpu mentioned
Wole Soyinka, Bala Usman, Gani Fawehinmi and Balarabe Musa. He concluded by decrying that our society “tends
to have parallax view of heroism, the kind of view that permits the acknowledgement of a man’s contribution to the
society only when he is six feet down.

The renowned journalist from a remote village called Ikot Udo Ossiom in Akwa Ibom could be said to be one of the
few persons that has not been caught in the cobweb of proverbial scriptural saying that prophets lack honour at
their hometowns. When he was awarded 1987 International Editor of the year, the authority of his native local
council in Ukanafun caused the people to roll out drums.

The Mass Communication department of Akwa Ibom State Polytechnic at Ikot Osurua is named after him. In 2021,
Inoyo Toro Foundation, an exceptional NGO that has been pushing for eradication of poverty through
empowerment of teachers and other professionals, endowed Ray Ekpu Award for Investigative Journalism in Akwa
Ibom.

Until Nana came up with “Rare Ray”, a tribute to Ekpu at 75, so many people were of the view that Ekpu has only
been a thorn in the flesh of some Nigerian power brokers, who, in turn, used to pay him back by putting him in
docks and behind bars time and again. From Nana’s revelation, there have been other casualties on account of
Ekpu’s celebrity status in journalism.

This category of casualties, like victims of rape, may find difficult to narrate their ordeals. One of such person has
been a final year Mass Communication student who was then glowing with freshly accoutrements of girlishness and
joy of about bagging a college degree, as well as having a husband in-the-waiting. In pre-marriage interview by her
suitor, she did not know anything about Ray Ekpu. The marriage proposal crashed abruptly.

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 4
                                        Reviewing parallax view of heroism

From a source worth relying on, one of the reasons Udom Inoyo, former Vice Chairman of Exxon Mobil companies
in Nigeria and founder of Inoyo Toro Foundation, was coldly treated in the build-up to 2023 general elections by
political establishment led by Udom Emmanuel was the foundation’s institution of award in honour of Ekpu. The
envy and contempt trailing that lofty gesture got worst in that the maiden edition of the award was won by Uyo-
based journalist called Ekemini Simon, whose investigative reports sometimes brought alleged illicit act of the
Akwa Ibom State government to public attention.

Notwithstanding few exceptions, Parallax view of Heroism still holds sway in many instances. Although he played
substantial role in the creation of Kogi State in 1991, Yakubu Mohammed, another highflying journalist and co-
founder of Newswatch, seems to be given identification of an outcast by the powers-that-be in the state. At a certain
time, Ekpu himself was once given some sort of pariah recognition by certain persons at top echelon of societal
scheme of things in Akwa Ibom.

Ekpu has been attributing his relative success and professional accomplishment to God, and not any extraordinary
actions of his. It could be added that God or divine power functions most times on humans through instrumentality
of other humans or other earthly beings. Let the instruments of such honour keep functioning.

Ekanem sent this piece through nsikak4media@gmail.com

In this article Prince Ekong Udom
Ray Ekpu
Related

Pele: World king of football had Warri ancestry

January 6, 2023

My journalism journey

January 31, 2023

The 25% Abuja cut-off mark

April 21, 2023

‘Strengthening public confidence in media through ombudsman’

April 25, 2023

When Udom raises more questions than answers

May 16, 2023

The president would be held into account

June 8, 2023

Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on WhatsApp Share on Telegram

                                                                  Page 4 of 4
                             Reviewing parallax view of heroism

2022 GUARDIAN Newspapers.


Load-Date: August 28, 2023


  
