

                                                                                                            Page 1 of 2
                                 Akinnola Doles Out N.25 Million to Wives of Dead Journalists




              Akinnola Doles Out N.25 Million to Wives of Dead Journalists
                                                       Daily Champion (Lagos)
                                                        April 29, 2010 Thursday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 317 words
Byline: Mansur Oladunjoye
Dateline: Lagos

Body


A journalist cum lawyer, Richard Akinnola Tuesday gave N250, 000 to the wives of five slain journalists.

The beneficiaries included: wife of the former photo editor of Vanguard Newspaper, Mrs. Grace Oyeleru; Mrs. Lydia
Efenji whose husband died on April 14, 2009; Mrs. Tonia Ike Ekeje, also of AIT; Mrs. Adeyinka Dehinsilu of the
Daily Times and Mrs. Ojenike Ohu whose, hubby The Guardian staff killed by unknown assassins .

Presenting N50, 000 to each of the beneficiaries on behalf of the Richard Akinnola Foundation at the Nigeria Union
of Journalists (NUJ) Lagos State Council, Akinnola said the foundation initiated the widows' scheme after a
thorough realisation that Nigeria Journalists have always been neglected to their own plight.

He said, "Last year, I started thinking about the conditions of our people; I felt something had to be done, especially
to affect the lives of widows and children of slain Journalists positively," adding that the scheme shall soon be
registered with Board of Trustees in place to attract the involvement of corporate bodies and public spirited
individuals.

Akinnola regreted that the nation's Police have never unraveled the circumstance surrounding the killing of any
journalist, from Dele Giwa, Godwin Agbroko, Bayo Ohu, Edo Sule-Ugbagwu, Abayomi Ogundeji to Efenji Efenji.

He urged journalists to prepare their will in expectation of the worst so that their loved ones will not be left to suffer,
adding that it won't be out of place for NUJ to have insurance scheme.

"Allow your wives to know your investments and bank accounts so that if anything happens, those investments and
accounts are not claimed by a non-family member; also ensure that your wives are made your next-kin in any
transaction," he urged.

The Corporate Affairs manager, Daar Communication, Johnson Onime described Akinola's gesture as a worthy
cause that deserved to be emulated by all and sundry.


Load-Date: April 29, 2010

                                                                                 Page 2 of 2
                  Akinnola Doles Out N.25 Million to Wives of Dead Journalists



