

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2
  Master of coup on receiving end of armed challenge for power: Nigerian rebellion comes after years of despotic
                                       rule where criticism can end in death




  Master of coup on receiving end of armed challenge for power: Nigerian
rebellion comes after years of despotic rule where criticism can end in death
                                              The Guardian (London)
                                                   April 23, 1990



Copyright 1990 Guardian Newspapers Limited

Length: 783 words
Byline: By PATRICK WILMOT

Body


 GENERAL Ibrahim Babangida is Nigeria's most accomplished coup maker, no mean feat in a country which has
experienced scores of successful and unsuccessful coups in its 30 years since independence.

 He confessed (some say boasted) to Nigeria's Newswatch magazine recently that he had participated in all the
successful coups except the first, the January 1966 insurrection in which most of the civilian leaders of the first
republic were killed.

He was also presumably well equipped to prevent coups, and boasted that the coup in which he overthrew Major
General Mohammed Buhari in August 1985, was the final coup, the coup to end all coups.

 One of his justifications for executing General Mamman Vatsa in March 1986 and the 10 other alleged coup
plotters was to teach ambitious officers that coup making was serious business.

Previously the unwritten rule was that coup attempts in which no blood was shed should not be punished with
death, and the evidence indicated that Vatsa and the other accused had barely got to the talking stage of coup
plotting, a far cry from the confessed successes of the coup master himself.

 What the killing of Vatsa established was that Gen Babangida could not be removed in a bloodless coup, since
failure meant death. This served as a double-edged warning, not only to the challengers to the power of the
President, but also to the President himself, that the gloves were off.

 Prior to Vatsa's execution, Gen Babangida had listened to, and manipulated, critical views, earning himself the
ambiguous epithet of Maradona, after the celebrated footballer.

 After the Vasta incident, he became increasingly intolerant and paranoid, crushing all opposition and cultivating an
army of sycophants.

The Nigerian labour congress, academic staff union of universities, national association of Nigerian students, and
Newswatch all felt the presidential boot. A legal critic, Gani Fawehinmi, who accused senior security officials of

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 2
  Master of coup on receiving end of armed challenge for power: Nigerian rebellion comes after years of despotic
                                       rule where criticism can end in death

murdering a journalist, Dele Giwa, spent most of last year in jail, and other journalists were interrogated by the
state security service.

 The government voted to set aside vast amounts of money to pay campus informants and vigilante groups who
threatened and harassed alleged critics. Many lecturers were dismissed, deported, and jailed for bizarre crimes,
such as purchasing a gallon of petrol to set fire to a convocation square of solid concrete where Gen Babangida
was supposed to preside.

 Gen Buhari and Brigadier Tunde Idiagbon, Gen Babangida's predecessors, were ousted partly because they
boasted about their toughness and contempt for human rights and freedom of speech. Gen Babangida continued in
this repressive tradition, further undermining whatever legitimacy his regime might have hoped for through
manipulation and control of the media.

 He employed the machiavellian principle that men must either be crushed or pampered because they are able to
revenge minor injuries but not fatal ones.

 Gen Babangida's generosity was legendary even before he became president. He assiduously cultivated the
loyalty of his lower ranks through judicious gifts at marriages, funerals, and birth ceremonies.

 However, this bartered popularity began to wear thin when his biting austerity programme intensified the poverty of
the poor and effectively destroyed the salary-earning middle classes, leaving the spectacular corruption and
flamboyance of the instant millionaires and uniformed nouveau riche to mock the severe hardship of the vast
majority of the population.

 Like heads of state before him, Gen Babangida surrounded himself with a cabal of praise singers who made him
increasingly unpopular, while at the same time leading him to believe that he was a very popular leader.

 These men and women are now doubtlessly congratulating him on successfully crushing the latest coup attempt,
without considering how the politically illiterate rebel group of junior officers could have succeeded in creating the
confusion it did.

 Twenty years after the end of the civil war, a group of Nigerian soldiers still do not accept the unity of the country.
This says little for the moral leadership of the regime and casts further doubt on the right of the military to rule, even
for a limited period.

 Twenty-one years of military rule have shown no benefits commensurate with the suffering inflicted on the Nigerian
people.

 If Gen Babangida truly wants to be the last coup maker, he would do himself and his country a wealth of good by
handing over power to a democratically elected government as soon as possible, and convincing his military
colleagues never to interfere in politics again.

Gunsmoke is hazardous for the health of nation and military alike.


Load-Date: June 12, 2000


  
