

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 3
                                             Jitters As MEND Threatens Another Blast




                                Jitters As MEND Threatens Another Blast
                                                       Daily Champion (Lagos)
                                                     October 21, 2010 Thursday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1159 words
Byline: Godwin Akor
Dateline: Makurdi

Body


Nigerian has again been thrown into fear because of the threat by the Movement for the Emancipation of Niger
Delta (MEND) that it would soon cause another bomb blast in the Federal Capital, Abuja.

The threat came from no less a personality than MEND's Asari Dokubo who said the questioning of Raymond
Dokpesi and Henry Okah by security agencies over the October 1 bomb blasts in Abuja irked the organization, so, it
would unleash more terror on the people.

Dokubo's statement came after President Goodluck Jonathan had said that some people may have used MEND for
the dastardly act. He held a meeting with the militants thinking that they meant well for the nation.

If Jonathan thought that MEND would abandon its cause and allow peace to reign, then, Dokubo has told him in
clear terms that the organization should be treated as an enemy.

This is why the federal government's complacent approach to MEND's claim that it caused the disgrace that took
place in the presence of some world leaders should be viewed and handled with the seriousness it deserves.

There is no doubt that MEND is annoyed because of Dokpesi and Orka's arrest because they are both from the
Niger Delta but this question must be asked : Is Jonathan not from the Niger Delta region?.

If Jonathan, according to MEND, has erred because the two persons were questioned, should MEND not blame
itself for destabilizing an administration headed by one of their own?

I have never seen where a dog eats dog, but the militants from the Niger Delta are trying to make other Nigerians
believe that the people of Niger Delta hate themselves. The attempt by some people to make the situation look as if
Jonathan is not liked by his people should be however resisted.

MEND must know that the Yoruba did not vote for Obasanjo in 1999 but he became president. In fact activities of
the Odua Peoples Congress (OPC) became more pronounced when Obasanjo became a civilian president.

Heating up the polity and creating panic in Abuja where President Goodluck Jonathan sits would create a situation
of insecurity not only in Abuja but in other parts of Nigeria. If the Niger Delta region was neglected during the

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 3
                                      Jitters As MEND Threatens Another Blast

previous administrations and MEND did not bomb Abuja, why must be now that Jonathan is presiding over the
affairs of the nation?

If the Niger Delta region became impoverished when a son of the soil was not president, should the situation not
improve when their son is occupying the exalted seat of president?.

When the position of MEND is critically assessed in relation to the October 1 bomb blasts in Abuja and the threat it
has issued, one is inclined towards believing that the organization which claims to be emancipating the people may
have been used by politicians to discredit Jonathan and disunite the people the more.

It may not be out of point for one to say that material inducement is being used to persuade MEND to create
anarchy so that in a situation of confusion, the soldiers would stage a comeback.

Where is the chief of army staff?, where is the inspector general of police?, where is the chief of air staff?, where is
the chief of naval staff?, where is the SSS overall boss?, where is the overall boss of the civil defence corps?,
where is the president's security adviser and other security personnel who should give the nation a focus in times
like this?.

Why must Nigeria be subjected to intimidation by a few?, why must one person threaten to bomb the Federal
Capital Territory and the nation is begging and hailing him?

This act of cowardice by the authorities must stop. If the rest of Nigerians decide to incite the citizenry and threaten
the security of the nation, what would the country turn out to be?

This is not the first time Nigeria has witnessed bomb blasts. A parcel bomb was used to shatter the foremost
journalist, Dele Giwa, during the Babangida era; in 1986, a plane conveying army officers was shattered at Ejigbo
near Lagos, the amount of destruction bomb blasts have done to lives and property in Nigeria cannot be quantified
but has Nigeria broken up?.

What appears to be happening is that the strength of the Federal Government is being tested because this is the
first time a group would come out to declare that it would make Nigeria ungovernable by causing series of bomb
blasts in the nation's seat of power.

Can anybody tell the Israeli or American president that he has plans to bomb Jerusalem or New York?. Can what is
happening in Nigeria happen in the smallest African country?

My advice to Jonathan is that he should forget the issue of 2011 and face the problem of insecurity squarely. He
may not know that his attention is being diverted so that there would be breakdown of law and order and the
truncation of democracy. He may not know that good governance is a pre-condition for his eligibility to contest for
the presidency in 2011.

Jonathan has several advantages over others that are eyeing the presidency. As a sitting president, he would be
campaigning with all the paraphernalia of his office just as all the governors would give him the respect that a
president deserves.

Jonathan is facing only a fraction of the problems that would be coming up as he prepares for the contest. Apart
from the problems that would arise from within the Niger Delta region, desperate politicians from the North would
not just allow him to have a smooth sail. That is why Boko Haram may not allow peace to reign because the
extremists think that a leader is anointed on the basis of religion.

More trouble may come his way from the retired generals who think that leaders must be appointed or
selected/elected from among them by all means.

Trouble may come from some of the governors who think they were elected on the basis of religion. Jonathan
should know that kidnapping in the east may not end easily as it has been discovered to be a lucrative business.

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 3
                                     Jitters As MEND Threatens Another Blast

This is why the security of the nation should be given priority. While the president meets with stakeholders in Igbo
land and find ways of ending kidnapping, service chiefs and heads of security agencies should be summoned to
keep MEND, Boko Haram and so on in check. Where an organization is illegal, it should be proscribed.

The president should, as a matter of urgency, summon the governors for a discussion on the threat to national
security. MEND is no longer a threat to Abuja and the Niger Delta alone but to the entire nation. If the amnesty
programme has failed, then, another solution to the Niger Delta problem should be devised.

tThere arises a challenge for the present attorney general of the federation because the former Attorney General,
Mike Kaase Aondakaa, evolved the amnesty programme which brought about temporary peace in the Niger Delta.

The heads of the various security agencies also have a role to play as they must justify the confidence reposed in
them by the federal government. The time to act is now, tomorrow may be too late since MEND has threatened to
scatter Abuja again.


Load-Date: November 15, 2010


  
