

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 3
                                                 Gen. Babangida On The Marble




                                        Gen. Babangida On The Marble
                                                     News Chronicle (Nigeria)
                                                      August 13, 2021 Friday



Copyright 2021 The News Chronicle. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 1178 words

Body


56 views | Ozodinukwe Okenwa | August 13, 2021

Retired General Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida (IBB) broke his silence last weekend on the rising Arise TV network.
Ms Ngozi Alaegbu travelled to Minna, Niger State, to interview IBB inside his mind-boggling edifice. Living
reclusively in obscene opulence in the city near Abuja since beating a forced hasty retreat from the national political
scene post-June 12 Babangida must have considered it auspicious making himself heard again. The big man does
not need any introduction to anyone conversant enough with his 'Maradonic' political exploits in power decades
ago.

Gen. Babangida rose to national prominence in the middle of the 80's when he deposed a dictator in power at that
time, Gen. Muhammadu Buhari, (himself a coup plotter who had overthrown a democratically-elected government
of the late Shehu Shagari). He ruled Nigeria guilefully for eight odd years. He made name for himself by
bastardising the promised democratic processes and institutionalising corruption. During his giddy years 'settlement
syndrome' became a favourable 'weapon' with which the opposition were compromised.

A master of political perfidy Babangida was demystified and taken to global infamy by June 12, a presidential poll
he organized and turned to a national tragedy after the winner and the loser had emerged. His criminal annulment
of the result of the free and fair election won by the late Bashorun MKO Abiola led to chaos and loss of lives. Abiola
lost his life (assassinated) while fighting for the mandate Nigerians freely gave him.

General Babangida is better described as a crafty bloody militrician, a professional coup plotter who excelled in his
military career through perfidy, graft and shady dealings. Officially he had acknowledged himself as a 'Maradona'
and 'evil genius' but IBB is certainly more than that. He was inordinately ambitious and treacherous! Like the late
Argentine soccer legend, Diego Maradona, who mesmerized and dazzled the global soccer community with his
football talent Babangida dribbled the opposition until June 12 arrived with a bang and confused and consumed
him.

He died militarily and politically after perfidiously spending billions of Dollars on a bogus transition scheme and
taking Nigerians for a fraudulent democratic ride. IBB was an enemy of democracy, free press and freedom. A

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                                          Gen. Babangida On The Marble

mass murderer he orchestrated the Ejigbo fatal plane crash that killed scores of promising officers! He killed Dele
Giwa, the great investigative journalist, with a letter bomb! He committed a good number of atrocities that
ordinarily he ought to be docked and jailed like the incarcerated former South African President, Jacob Zuma.

Featuring exclusively on Arise Television the 'evil genius' never disappointed. A hard look thrown his way indicated
that he is indeed getting nearer to the grave. Yet as he joined the Octogenarian club he looked graceful in his old
age. He spoke his mind without fear or favour.

Generally he spoke about the presidential poll slated for 2023. He talked about the massive corruption in the
system, present and past. He bared his mind on the agitations rocking the nation championed by the detained
Nnamdi Kanu and Sunday Ighoho. He answered questions concerning June 12, democracy and the Nigerian
present condition.

On June 12 the retired dictator was in his best treacherous element. He declared that the controversial annulment
of the Abiola victory was based on the fact that if it materialised there would have been a violent coup d'etat and
more instability in the polity. He admitted that pressure was mounted on him by civilian and military elements to
cancel the election. What he never told us was why he left the late Gen. Abacha behind as he retired the senior
officers in the eve of his departure from power.

On the agitation for both Biafra and Oduduwa Republics the General predicted failure for the efforts saying that
Nigerians did not believe in secession. He never told us when he conducted a referendum to arrive at such
imbecilic conclusion. IBB made it clear Nigerians cherished their nation prefering to remain one yet what he failed to
appreciate was that those supporting Ighoho or Kanu are Nigerians and not foreigners.

Nigerians may be a happy people in love with peace but when the system is broken then something better ought to
give!

On corruption in the system Gen. Babangida scored his highest point. He declared that he was surprised seeing
those who stole billions walking free and enjoying their loot! He claimed that he fought corruption better than what
'Mr Integrity' is presently doing! He hit the bull's eye when he claimed that those that served under him could be
seen as 'saints' compared to the Buharists and 'Buharideens' presently in power.

On the general elections slated for 2023 the General never minced words calling for a new generation of leaders.
He said he would go for a President 60 years or below as compared to the present old men running Nigeria
aground and ruining her prospects for greatness. By that singular declaration Babangida must have had Atiku
Abubakar and Bola Tinubu in mind. Atiku has never hidden his intention to contest the presidency yet again come
2023 despite the fact that he is getting older and older. Ditto Asiwaju Tinubu whose official age is put at 69 but
romours are flying about that he must have doctored his age!

Even sixty years IBB suggested is not good enough. Nigeria needs desperately a young man in his early or late 40s
to take over power post-Buharism to knock sense into the senseless system. Africa remains a hopeless helpless
continental case because it is brimming with youths but led by gerontocrats. In contrast Europe is an old continent
of old men and shrinking youth but governed by young men. Take Emmanuel Macron of France, Justin Trudeau of
Canada and Scott Morrison of Australia for examples.

Gerontocrats in power from Abidjan to Abuja, Conakry to Yaounde. Alassane Ouattara, Muhammadu Buhari, Alpha
Conde, Paul Biya they are all holding sway; they represent what is wrong leadership-wise in mother Africa. But
President Ouattara of Ivory Coast is an exception in terms of service delivery and world-class competence. A great
achiever and big dreamer he has effortfully transformed his country in a space of a decade after a protracted
political crisis that saw the economy devastated.

Unlike his Nigerian counterpart he is never in the habit of blaming his predecessors for whatever problems or
challenges leadership or money could solve. As an economist and patriot he had used a wide global network and
connections to attract investors guaranteeing steady power supply and security of lives and properties.

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 3
                                         Gen. Babangida On The Marble

In the end Gen. Babangida has no moral, patriotic or democratic lesson to give to Nigerians. Himself, the late Gen.
Abacha, Obasanjo and President Muhammadu Buhari are the major problems of Nigeria. The earlier they joined
Abacha in hell the better for our collective survival as a great nation under God or Allah!

SOC Okenwa

soco_abj_2006_rci@hotmail.fr

Gen. Babangida


Load-Date: August 13, 2021


  
