

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 2
                            Ade Abolurin - Good Citizen of the Federal Republic (GCFR) [opinion]




      Ade Abolurin - Good Citizen of the Federal Republic (GCFR) [opinion]
                                                             Daily Trust (Abuja)
                                                             October 25, 2012



Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1022 words
Byline: Idang Alibi

Body


The mission of the Information Minister Labaran Maku-led National Good Governance Tour is not only to see and
report to Nigerians the concrete projects on ground that have either been completed or are on-going, the initiative is
also to highlight or draw attention to even innovative idea or approach to governance that exemplifies good
governance.

I am happy to announce that in the course of the on-going nation-wide projects inspection tour, which began in the
FCT on September 20, we have come across so early in the day one very good example of a Nigerian public officer
who can be announced as the poster person of this administration. That man is Dr John Ade Abolurin,
Commandant-General of the National Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC). Abolurin epitomises frugality,
focus, patriotism, sense of mission and above all, honesty and prudence in the management of public funds. This
man deserves to be promoted as an exemplary public officer because his conduct and approach to governance are
sufficiently impressive enough and therefore worthy of recommendation to others.

On the very first day of the tour, the team visited the Civil Defence Academy in Sauka near the Nnamdi Azikiiwe
International Airport. The Academy, as the name suggests, is meant for the training of recruits into the Corps. When
Abolurin disclosed that all the structures on ground in the Academy were built with a 'paltry' sum of N1.5 billion,
there was a spontaneous outbreak of praise for him among the journalists, civil society representatives and other
stakeholders who constitute membership of the team. These segments of society who are usually very critical,
cynical and stingy with praise could not help themselves but poured a lot of generous words on Abolurin, describing
him as one of the very few honest and prudent public officers that can be found in the country and that if other
public officers were like him this nation would have moved forward.

It is only the television medium that can effectively capture for those who have not gone to Sauka to see for
themselves what Abolurin has done with the sum of N1.5 billion. What is on ground in Sauka needs to be seen to
be believed and appreciated. In a country where in spite of the existence of the Bureau for Public Procurement,
many public projects are still executed at about 1,000 times the cost in neighbouring countries, what is in Sauka is
truly a pleasant surprise. It is known all over the world that Nigeria is the most lucrative market for construction jobs.
We got this dubious reputation because of the inglorious practice of padding the cost of execution of projects so
high in order to feed corruption.

But in Sauka, Abolurin has been able to build male and female hostels, an auditorium, fish pond, dog training
facilities, tar roads, equip the structures with facilities and do so many other things, all with the sum of N1.5 billion.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                       Ade Abolurin - Good Citizen of the Federal Republic (GCFR) [opinion]

Journalists and those other hard-to-please members of society on the team remarked that in other agencies,
ministries and department of government that sum of money which Abolurin used to do that number of impressive
things will not even be enough to build the auditorium which was just one of the many things Abolurin did.

Several years ago the late eminent journalist Dele Giwa said that Nigerians were no longer shockable. So many
atrocities are committed in our country but we do not seem moved by them. If it were not so what Abolurin has done
in Sauka with N1.5 billion should have provoked a chain of reaction in the highest reaches of government in the
country. Many public do-gooders would have come out boldly demanding that a public inquiry be instituted without
delay to find out how one chief executive of a public institution could use such an amount to do so much and why it
is otherwise in many other MDAs in the country. Abolurin's good example is a pleasantly rude shock to a people
who have become inured against scandalous corruption and the misuse of public funds. His use of 1.5 billion to do
all that is visible on ground in Sauka should be a ringing indictment against most public officers in Nigeria who
should bury their heads in shame.

Abolurin has confirmed my own personal thesis about Nigeria that if over the past 30 years when corruption grew
dangerous horns in our country, we have been consistently applying even 20 per cent of the revenue we have been
earning judiciously in development projects; we would have by now become a fairly developed country. But we do
not. Our leaders trivialise or tend to devalue our national currency. They talk about a billion naira as if it was some
few miserable hundreds of Naira. You see a few kilometres of tarred road and they tell you several billions have
been used to construct it. You see a public building that is worth only a few millions of Naira and the officers who
superintended its construction will tell you without any blushing that several billions have been used to construct it.
And no one questions such scandalous claims. But Abolurin has exposed the level of thievery in our country by
showing that a billion is no small money and that it can do much in the hands of anyone who is honest and is
concerned for the public good. What Abolurin has done in Sauka will surely prick the consciences of thousands of
lying and thieving officials in Nigeria.

When I shared with a friend, Godwin Agim, who is a top shot in the NSCDC, our positive impression of Abolurin, he
was more effusive in his praise of his boss. He said for them who are insiders and who know and feel the full extent
of the good Abolurin represents, he deserves even greater national applause than he is getting because his hard
work, dedication to duty, commitment to his goals, his concern for the wellbeing and welfare of his workers and his
prudence in the management of public resources entrusted to his care are exemplary. He said it is these attributes
that have made it possible for Abolurin to have taken the NSCDC from ground zero to the height hero that it has
become in Nigeria today and have made the NSCDC the preferred destination of many job seekers in our country.


Load-Date: October 25, 2012


  
