

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 3
                                           Re - Babangida's Age And Agenda [opinion]




                              Re - Babangida's Age And Agenda [opinion]
                                                             Leadership (Abuja)
                                                       August 29, 2010 Sunday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1389 words
Byline: Max Gbanite

Body


Aniebo Nwamu, a veteran journalist of great repute, is one of those whose writing I enjoy reading because of the
intellect exhibited in his articles. However, like other columnists who must write on issues weekly, he is entitled to
suffer a 'writer's block,' an affliction that happens when an intelligent writer mixes serious issues with the mundane
just to fill the vacuum of his column. Having read Nwamu's column titled "Babangida's Age and Agenda", published
in LEADERSHIP SUNDAY of August 22, 2010, I am convinced of my earlier assertion of 'writer's block.'

Since he confessed that he was in Minna to meet with Gen. Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida in company of other
journalists, his readers expected him to report on the current state of health and lucidity of the amiable and
compassionate General during their interactive session, as well as whether IBB was coherent enough, had a
presence of mind and was articulate during his presentation and in answering their hard-no-holds-barred-questions.
For the record, Babangida was born on 17th August, 1941, and at age three became one of the legendary scholar,
of Malam Najoji. By the time he entered elementary school in 1950, he was already ahead of his age mates with a
remarkable retentive memory. He entered secondary school in 1956 and during that era, was already reading Dr.
Tai Solarin's articles under the column "Thinking With You" (in the Daily Times).

That Aniebo did not read at age 8 does not mean that IBB could not; after all, the levels of development differ, at
least that is what child psychologists in their various research efforts have said. It is therefore unfair for Nwamu to
deny his readers what he really observed; i.e., the actual state of mind of IBB.

However, if his postulations on IBB showing signs of probable senility in future were based on medical observation
of the man, then we need to know when and where such diagnosis took place, and if based on spiritual observation,
that too requires some further empirical studies to properly ascertain.

Having said this, it is also very commendable of Aniebo to state without equivocation his position on the much
dogged issues often rehashed by the South-west media and their paid assassin-pen-pushers, i.e. June 12, the
Okigbo Panel report, Dele Giwa, etcetera. Nwamu posited, "In my heart of hearts, I believe IBB had no hand in the
murder of my senior colleague Giwa....; the Okigbo report did not say that IBB stole $12.4 billion. It said the Gulf oil
windfall was not put in regenerative investments. As to June 12, I can testify that the annulment of the June 12,
1993 presidential election was not Babangida's most grievous offence as a military leader." He is very correct. I
have always stated that the sacking of President Shehu Shagari who won an election in 1983 - an election
adjudged superior to that of 2003 and 2007 - is more sacrosanct than the June 12 annulment.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                                    Re - Babangida's Age And Agenda [opinion]

It is imperative to remind Aniebo Nwamu that IBB did not mismanage the economy. Instead, he leap-frogged the
nation into the global community and put the nation ahead of Greece and other nations by accepting the imperative
of Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP), which the previous administrations of Shagari and Buhari called
'austerity measures,' and the derivatives of SAP led to 'deregulation and diversification' of the economy. The words
of my friend Prince

Kassim Afegbua, IBB's fearless spokesman, in his essay published in Thisday on August 20, 2010 , aptly cures
Aniebo's mismanagement-of-the-economy theory, when Afegbua challenged Nigerians to find the answers to the
following: "What was IBB thinking when he commenced privatisation of universities in Nigeria; and when he
licensed private television and radio stations; what warranted his establishment of federal universities of technology;
what was on his mind when he opened up the economy that led to liberalising the banking sector; What about
ECOMOG forces that stabilized the West African region; the Technical Aids Corps; the movement of the capital
from Lagos to Abuja? What of the establishment of National Directorate of Employment, which is still training
Nigerian youths today; what about the opening up of the rural areas for the poor to feel the impact of government
through DFRRI programme; what about MAMSER; and the Federal Road Safety Commission?"

Kindly allow me to add the following mismanaged policies of IBB: the creation of 11 out of the 36 states and 239 out
of the existing 774 local governments; establishment of 5 additional zonal commands for the Nigeria Police Force;
creation of State Security Services, Defence Intelligence Agency, the National Intelligence Agency; establishment of
National Drug Law Enforcement Agency, from which the EFCC was created; privatisation of the airlines industry
and telecommunications, opening up the GSM phenomenon; construction of the Third Mainland Bridge in Lagos
and over 30,000 kilometres of federal highways; establishment of Peoples Bank, Agricultural Bank, Federal Urban
Mass Transit, construction of 10 switch-gear stations to enhance NITEL-back bone, etc.

Funding of the programmes may have informed Nwamu's theory of mismanagement. Yet, subsequent
administrations after IBB, especially, those of Obasanjo/Atiku and Yar'Adua/Jonathan, were definitely not better
managers of the economy because they cannot tell Nigerians what they did to improve the economy. They signed
budgets without implementation. Nwamu should kindly find out what these monies were spent on or how well these
people managed the economy better than IBB. While making comparisons, it is worthy to note that what IBB's
administration received as allocations in the eight years of its existence was equal to what Obasanjo/Atiku received
in one year, and what Yar'Adua/Jonathan received in six months.

In conclusion, Nwamu's failure to articulate to his readers what candidate IBB presented to the journalists in Minna
during the interactive session was wrong. That was why John Diefenbaker said, "Freedom is the right to be wrong,
not the right to do wrong." Therefore, Aniebo Nwamu should decide if it was wrong to deny his readers the right to
know what IBB said that he forgot in the presidency, and why he wants to come back. In that case, allow me to
mention the agenda. IBB wants to encourage true fiscal federalism (i.e. resource control by states); evolution of
power away from the centre by giving greater autonomy to the states and local governments; establishment of local
government and state police commands to augment the strength of the Nigeria Police Force to secure the lives and
properties of citizens; reduce the number of federal ministries like Agriculture, Water Resources, Education, and
Environment by making them supervisory departments and remitting their budgets directly to the rural communities
where farmers and the rural poor can directly benefit and improve their lot; strengthen the military command and
our foreign policy so that the nation may be respected again; properly fund anti-corruption agencies to be more
proactive in their fight against corruption; develop and establish a lasting infrastructure that guarantees free, fair,
secure and acceptable elections in the country as a template for future generations under democracy; and create
an enabling environment for healthcare delivery and lasting sports infrastructural development; privatize the energy-
power sector, and all these will be done in four years.

IBB could not have built any personal industries to employ millions of Nigerians because the infrastructures he put
in place have already created the jobs and wealth; and his new agenda will take the nation higher, open up the
economy wider through diversification and create millions of jobs and wealth for Nigerians. Besides, former
President Olusegun Obasanjo vindicated him as not being a corrupt leader and challenged anyone with information
to prove otherwise to come forward, and none did. Therefore, IBB's age is insignificant; rather, his agenda is what
sets him high and above all those who have indicated their interest to contest the presidency of Nigeria in 2011.

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 3
                                   Re - Babangida's Age And Agenda [opinion]

That is precisely why Prof. Wole Soyinka said, "I like Babangida's personality, sense of honour and the sincerity of
his ambition. He is a sincere leader with commendable listening capacity."


Load-Date: August 30, 2010


  
