

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 4
                                                    The editors' editor




                                                The editors' editor


                                                   The Nation (Nigeria)
                                                September 25, 2022 Sunday



Copyright 2022 The Nation All Rights Reserved




Length: 1956 words

Body


 I have had cause to celebrate The Punch at every of its major landmark ceremonies, including its 25th anniversary
as well as during the opening of its magnificent headquarters, The Punch Place, sitting majestically and
conspicuously at Magboro, Ogun State, on the Lagos-Ibadan Expressway. I know why.

But today, I want to join others in celebrating a man whose editorship of the popular tabloid would for long be
remembered, especially by those of us who had cause to cross his path at The Punch. A man that many journalists
regard as a thoroughbred, with a nose for news and a specialist in headline casting. I am talking about Alhaji
Najeem Akanni Jimoh, who turned 70 on September 14.

It would be sheer ingratitude for someone like myself who was able to secure a job at The Punch in 1985 despite
the fact that I did not know anybody there. I would explain. At the time, unemployment had started to rear its ugly
head in the country; just that never in our wildest imaginations could we ever have thought it would become a
monster that it has become today. No thanks to the curse of bad leadership.

I looked forward to what I can call the D-Day when I received the letter of interview. I remembered how the joy in
our hearts knew no bounds when myself and a friend, Olumide Awogbemila, received the letters, with the
intimidating logo of The Punch. It was a privilege. Awogbemila and I were then living at Ebute-Metta area of Lagos,
indeed just about seven minutes trekking distance apart.

At last, the day of interview came. But what we were confronted with at The Punch was not just an interview; it was
an examination. We arrived the company early in the morning and were there till late in the evening. Despite the
irregular payment of salaries that hallmarked the paper then, (I think) about 44 of us sat for the examination. I
remember this because I know that those who did not succeed were asked to leave in batches of 10. Whenever the
harbinger of what passed for both good and bad news then, Jide Kutelu, of blessed memory came to announce the
result, our adrenalin naturally rose. It was good news for those of us who were able to make it finally but bad news
for those who were dropped at every turn. That was the way it was on the three or four occasions that Kutelu came
with the news.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 4
                                                   The editors' editor

At the end of it all, only four of us were left in the room - Awogbemila, Ganiyu Aminu, Ganiyu Akogun and my
humble self. We were all course mates at the Department of Mass Communication, University of Lagos (UNILAG).
They then congratulated us and we congratulated ourselves. Now, why this long story when this piece is to eulogise
Jimoh on his 70th birthday?

The answer is simple. I had the opportunity of knowing Jimoh because of his resolve and that of the other senior
journalists who decided our fate in the examination to prioritise merit. He was then deputy editor of The Punch. But
then, he had tremendous influence, especially as the then editor, Nurudeen Alade Balogun (Uncle NAT, for short),
of blessed memory, was a liberal editor who allowed him such latitude. I remember the anxiety of those of us who
knew nobody in the system when some of our colleagues that came for the examination went into the offices of
these senior colleagues and emerged with either bottles of soft drink or table water. I remember how we wondered
aloud that these people needed not have wasted our time by inviting us for interview when they already had their
preferred candidates. But I was somewhat confident of making it even if I did not know what informed my
confidence. One of the questions I answered was to critique Decree Four promulgated by the Babangida
government in 1984. I tore the decree into shreds, using the then Dr Olatunji Dare's write-up on it in The Guardian
as compass.

But if I was so sure of what I wrote, how would I have known that others did not do better? However, it eventually
turned out that the four of us who were taken knew nobody at The Punch then.

This passes for something in a country where who you know determine what you get. And it partly explains why
Nigeria is the way it is today. If The Punch is soaring, this is one of the secrets. It was this level-playing field that
afforded me the opportunity of meeting Jimoh. And I cherish it a lot. I have never had any cause to regret the
chance meeting.

Let me quickly say that the fact that some of our colleagues could not join the company at that time did not confer
any special brilliance to those of us who were picked. Examination, as we know, is not always a true test of one's
ability. As a matter of fact, some of them joined the newspaper later as the demand for more hands presented itself.
Indeed, many of them too are doing well in their various endeavours today.

I must particularly be grateful to Jimoh for this wonderful opportunity because the 'eaglet' journalist that he
employed as a sub-editor in 1985 eventually rose to become editor of the daily title of the newspaper, a lifelong
ambition. He was in a position to influence decision otherwise. But he did not.

Working under Jimoh was exciting. Some other persons who passed through his tutelage, whether at The Punch or
elsewhere - Lawal Ogienagbon, Reuben Abati, Azubuike Ishiekwene, Tunde Akanni, Mikail Adegoke Mumuni, Feyi
Smith, and even a senior colleague, Tola Adeniyi, have all celebrated this easy going editor of all times, to mark his
joining the septuagenarian club.

Working under the one that we all refer to simply as 'Alhaji' presented many fond memories. Many have talked
about his humility, they have talked about his humanity, his dedication to journalism and to the people, his simplicity
and other attributes.

As Lawal mentioned in his piece on September 14, those of us who worked in The Punch at the time we did can
never forget '90 - 10'. So, what is '90 - 10'? It simply refers to the guguru and epa that was our regular snack in
those days. As a matter of fact, hardly could any day pass without some of us placing orders for '90 - 10'; that is 90
kobo groundnuts and 10 kobo local popcorn. Yes, you heard me right, 90 KOBO groundnuts and 10 KOBO guguru!
Today, our younger ones do not know that we once talked of our currency in terms of Naira and Kobo. Many do not
even know what the kobo looked like because it has become extinct. Again, no thanks to bad governance. Whoever
bought the '90 - 10' would place it on the table and anyone interested needed no special invitation to come to
partake. It was a rallying factor of sort. Even as editor, Jimoh himself would join in not only packing The Punch
('Pack a Punch' was once upon a time the popular slogan of the paper) but also the '90 - 10'! We ate it like a
family. But what I cannot still explain is whether we were fond of the guguru and epa because of the peculiar
financial predicament of the company at the time or because of our natural love for it. I guess however that the story

                                                                                                         Page 3 of 4
                                                  The editors' editor

would have changed by now not just because of the company's prosperity but also because of values that have
changed in the country generally.

Another incident I would not forget easily at The Punch was the day the four of us that were employed the same
day decided to go on strike in protest against the delay in paying our salaries. We were all on the sub-desk, so, we
did not have problems of logistics in executing the strike. We kept the plan close to our chests. On the appointed
date, we edited the stories as they came, and pretended as if we were sending them down for further processing;
so, it was difficult for anyone to suspect that we had something up our sleeves. It was very late in the day that it was
realised we were not sending the stories to the compugraphic department (which was the computer of the time) for
processing. To show how outdated compugraphic machines have now become, even my i-pad does not know
'compugraphic' as it kept on underlining it! I doubt if there is any newspaper that is still using compugraphic
machine in the country today.

However, when it dawned on all that we were on work-to-rule, we were invited for talks. I remember the role Jimoh
played. I think he had become editor then. How he tried to calm our frayed nerves, the sweet talks and all. But we
had said nothing was going to change if our salaries were not paid and we stuck to our guns. Eventually, the
accounts people were instructed to pay us and they brought our salaries in the usual brown envelopes for paying
salaries in those days. Just the four of us.

At this point, it is necessary to explain our resolve to down tools because it is not all the time that such an
opportunity presents itself. Of course we knew the company was in arrears of salaries before we joined. So, non-
payment of salaries should not be sufficient cause to down tools. And we had been coping until then, anyway.
Moreover, the four of us were still bachelors then, and so our needs were still relatively few.

But, we were blind to the leakages that were going on in the company when we were outside. However, now, as
insiders, we were privileged to see some of the reasons things were tight for the company. We were later proved
right. But, as usual with journalists, we hardly bothered about other things beyond headlines and deadlines.

I did not know whether our type of 'strike' had happened in the company before, but what I know was that some of
our colleagues wondered what informed our audacity.

Perhaps more confounding was the fact that whatever some people (including the four of us who went on strike)
thought would follow, never followed. This was due to the magnanimity of someone like Jimoh. Apparently his
activism in his university days played a critical role in considering more the values that we were adding to the
company at such hard times rather than the fresh-from-school radicalism that propelled our strike. Some editors in
his shoes would have orchestrated our exit from the system before we 'polluted' others, whether immediately or in
the near future. Although a newspaper like The Punch which rode to prominence on the crest of its clamour for a
better society ought not have done such, that would have amounted to nothing in the eyes of editors who would be
more anxious in pointing at the specks in the eyes of others, even when they have logs in theirs.

It is important to stress that the sky was the limit for journalists who worked under Jimoh. There was the latitude to
explore and showcase your talent. If I cast good headlines today, Jimoh was involved in shaping me in this regard.
No matter how knotty a headline appeared to be, he would crack the nut. Many of the stories which made the paper
to fly in its days as a pure tabloid were headlined by Jimoh, some of which incurred the wrath of the then military
rulers. One such headline that readily comes into mind was 'Dele Giwa bombed', when the frontline journalist, who
was editor and founder of the then vibrant Newswatch Magazine was killed by a parcel bomb on October 19, 1986.
That was what happened but the Federal Government was uncomfortable with the headline and the paper's
courageous handling of the story. It therefore sued The Punch and the Late Chief Gani Fawehinmi for sedition
(whatever is so called). One can go on and on.

All said, if both Christians and Muslims are celebrating Jimoh, it is for a reason. He is at home with everybody,
irrespective of creed. He builds bridges across all divides. He has a way of keeping in touch with his friends. That is
why till date, he is hardly alone. When he snaps his fingers, people respond. Such is his simplicity that even when
he turned 70, he did not make noise. If Jimoh were a politician, the noise that would have attended his birthday on
September 14 would still be reverberating.

                                                      Page 4 of 4
                                The editors' editor


Load-Date: September 26, 2022


 
