

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 2
                      ‘Our history is rotting away’: the newspaper archivists preserving Nigeria ’s past




 ‘Our history is rotting away’: the newspaper archivists preserving Nigeria’s
                                      past
                                                        The Guardian (London)
                                             August 10, 2023 Thursday 6:00 AM GMT



Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved




Section: GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT; Version:1
Length: 671 words
Byline: Ope Adetayo in Lagos
Highlight: Coups, civil wars, dictators, democracy … all the headlines that tell the country’s story since
independence in 1960 are to be saved for posterity by an ambitious archive project

Body


In a quiet office in Lekki, an affluent suburb of Lagos, Nigeria, Boyega Adediran gingerly opens a 1997 copy of PM
News and places a double-page spread on a large flatbed scanner. The newspaper was founded in 1994 but
stopped printing physical copies in 2015.

Scans of the fragile pages are quality checked by Grace Abraham and saved to a server that currently holds more
than 50,000 pages of what will become Nigeria’s first interactive digital newspaper archive.

A nonprofit startup called Archivi.ng is attempting to digitise every edition of every newspaper – 50 in all –
published in Nigeria since 1 January 1960, the year of independence from Britain.

The archive will launch its first tranche of documents in September. Dozens of volunteers have already spent
months scouring libraries and meeting with publishers to get copies of old papers.

“Nigerian history is inaccessible online, and the greatest repository of that history is old newspapers,” says Fu’ad
Lawal, the founder of Archivi.ng. “The newspapers from our history are rotting away in libraries and private
archives, and our mission is to stop the erasure and recapture all the history before we lose them for ever.”

Allegra Ayida, a Nigerian doctoral researcher in history at Yale University who hopes to use the archive when it
launches, says: “This exciting project fills an important gap in both accessibility and centralisation of a large volume
of information.”

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 2
                    ‘Our history is rotting away’: the newspaper archivists preserving Nigeria ’s past

“The potential of having a newspaper archive since independence would allow the tracing of Nigerian history across
60 years in a country that has had 15 different leaders, five military coups, a bitter civil war, an annulled election, an
interim administration and a brutal dictatorship,” she says.

Since independence, history has been removed then reintroduced to the school curriculum, depending on who was
in power in Nigeria’s revolving door of military dictatorships before democracy was restored in 1999.

In 2009, under President Yar’Adua, history was removed from the curriculum, ostensibly because there were not
enough teachers. Last year, the then president, Muhammadu Buhari, made the subject compulsory again.

Lawal has been surprised by the level of detail printed about the military coups and how much resistance there was
among editors. Newspaper offices would often be raided or shut down by the government, and journalists faced
intimidation, arrest and even death. One celebrated journalist, Dele Giwa, was killed by a parcel bomb in 1986
during Ibrahim Babangida’s presidency.

The best that has happened to us is democracy. There is so much we don’t know about the fine details of those
times

 Fu’ad Lawal, Archivi.ng founder

“The biggest discovery is not a single story. It is a series of events, the zeitgeist,” Lawal says. “We know so little
about the amount of resistance that the military government met. So when Nigerians say, ‘We need someone with
strong hands’, I say we don’t. The best thing that has happened to us is democracy. There is so much we don’t
know about the fine details of those times, and how they shaped our present.”

Lawal believes a lack of publicly accessible historical data contributed to Buhari’s return to power in 2015. He
previously ruled between 1983 and 1985 following a military coup.

“Without documentation, we have false nostalgia because if you looked at Buhari’s eight years [in his second term],
it’s like entering a deep cryogenic sleep in 1985 and waking up in 2015. He just continued where he stopped in
terms of policies and governance,” says Lawal.

Archivi.ng raised $15,000 in public donations for the archive, but needs $100,000 to complete the project.

The biggest challenge, however, is navigating Nigeria’s intellectual property law, which classifies newspapers as
“literary works”, meaning reproduction of any kind needs the publishers’ permission. According to Lawal, some have
been reluctant to help.

“We are doing the infrastructural work, we are digging the well [of information] for people to come and fetch,” he
says.


Load-Date: August 14, 2023


  
