

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 3
                                                     Tony Momoh: A Statesman




                                            Tony Momoh: A Statesman
                                                    Daily Independent (Nigeria)
                                                       April 23, 2019 Tuesday



Copyright 2019 Daily Independent. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 1719 words
Byline: Our Correspondents

Body


Prince Tony Momoh, the 165th child of King Momoh I of Auchi is 80 years old. I have known him for 42 years now.
As a young reporter in the Nigerian Chronicle in Calabar I was one of the ambitious young men who wanted to sit
on the editorial chair when it fell vacant. Six other people had the same ambition. So our General Manager, Chief
Effiong Essien, an ex-staff of the Daily Times, thought it was a good idea to bring a respected journalist from a
respected newspaper to come and do the needful. For Essien who was a stickler for excellence it was a nice way of
keeping ethnic titans at bay if the decision as to who should edit the two titles in the Corporation was done by a
prominent Editor as Tony Momoh, who was at the time the Editor of Daily Times. In the 70s, if you sent a young
person to buy you a newspaper you didn't need to tell him the name of the paper. He knew that it was the Daily
Times. That is the level of reverence with which the Daily Times was held at the time. That reverence was shared
by any man who sat on the chair as its Editor. He was seen among journalists at the time as the primus inter pares.

Momoh was brought into Calabar to conduct a written, practical test for the seven of us who wanted the job of the
Daily and Sunday Editors. I applied for the post of the Sunday Editor but we all took the same examination. The
next day we all went to the Public Service Commission for an interview. Momoh was there too. When my turn to be
interviewed came I was told "you came first in the written exam." I said I didn't know. And they asked why I did not
apply for the post of Editor of the Daily paper. I told them we were informed that the Ministry of Information had its
preferred candidate for that office. They said there was no such thing, that they would take their decision based on
the written exam and the interview. They asked me the difference between a daily and Sunday newspaper. I told
them. They asked me "can you edit a daily newspaper?" I replied in the affirmative. The job – a job I did not apply
for – was given to me much to the dismay of the ethnic jingoists who were pushing for their candidates. I was told
that Prince Momoh told the interviewing panel that since they bothered to bring him to come and conduct a written
test it was better to stick to the result of the test. Those were the days when merit was a cherished asset in
Nigeria's public service. But on assumption of duty as the Editor of the Nigerian Chronicle I realised that my
problems were just beginning. I had won the battle but not the war. The fellows in the production department who
were largely from the tribe that wanted their son to be the editor gave me hell. I had to report them to the General
Manager, Chief Effiong Essien, who called them to order.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                                             Tony Momoh: A Statesman

Tony Momoh had been almost everything there was to be in the journalism business, editor, a trainer, a manager
and a member of the Press Council under the venerable Alade Odunewu.

When he was appointed Minister of Information by President Ibrahim Babangida he had a rough time from his
colleagues who thought that he was the mastermind behind the enactment of a Press Council decree that was the
equivalent of a censorship code. They frustrated the functioning of the Press Council decree until it was reviewed.
The day the revised version was to be launched I asked Alade Odunewu whether he had read it, he answered in
the negative. I was worried that we had all assembled to validate a Press Council whose content we were not
aware of. Alade Odunewu said to me that Momoh had assured him that there was nothing to worry about. That was
the level of trust that Momoh was able to extract from his colleagues even on an issue that was crucial to the
survival of their industry. The press Council issue resurfaced during the Administration of General Abdulsalami
Abubakar. At that time Malam Ismaila Isa was the President of the NPAN and I was the General Secretary. We
labored to panel-beat the Press Council decree into a tolerable shape but the officials thought they knew better.
They injected all kinds of obnoxious clauses that made nonsense of our efforts at reaching an acceptable decision.
It was a big surprise that the 8th National Assembly had a brain wave and dusted up the idea in quite a draconian
form at a time that the revolution in digital journalism has made the Press Council idea an anathema.

When the Head of State, Sani Abacha, came up with the idea of the National Mass Media Commission and Press
Court in the 1995 Draft Constitution it was Momoh, who we called upon to look at the fine prints and tell us the
unseen implications. We held series of meetings which led to the publication of the position of the Nigerian Press
Organisation. It was a testy period for the Nigerian press. On one occasion, Uncle Sam Amuka, publisher of the
Vanguard and Life Patron of the NPAN, said to me: "Ray, you have to draft the communique for these meetings at
home and bring so that we do not waste too much time at these meetings. If we spend too much time discussing,
we may all be rounded up and put in prison." His advice made me a proactive Secretary of the group.

When Momoh was the Minister of Information he did something that I cannot forget. He called me to come and see
him in his office in Lagos. When I got there he told me that President Babangida was planning to go to France in a
month's time. He needed a document published in English and French for the trip. His officials in the Ministry told
him they would need three months to produce it. And he did not have three months to spare. So he said to himself, I
know a group of people who can do it within two weeks, the Newswatch Boys. That is why I sent for you, he said. I
waited in his office while he arranged for the funds for the execution of the job which had a two-week deadline. I
collected the money and the materials and told him he could go to bed, that we would deliver on schedule. I came
back to the office and told my people it was an emergency and that if the Minister thought we had the magic we
needed to let him know that indeed we had it. We delivered the job to Momoh's house within five days – on a
Sunday. He trusted us and we delivered nine days before the deadline. When I called him on that Sunday to say I
wanted to come and see him he said "I hope there is no problem." I said, "There is a problem. That's why I want to
come and see you." When I got to his house he was in panic. He asked "what is the problem?" I said, "the problem
is that I have come to deliver the job." We both laughed. He was eminently relieved.

Dele Giwa, the first Editor in Chief of Newswatch was from Edo State, the Auchi area from which Momoh comes.
Both of them had worked in the Daily Times. Both of them admired each other's professionalism and dedication to
duty and got close. When we started Newswatch, Momoh was the Minister of Information and Dele related to him
well. When Dele was killed in the parcel bomb incident Momoh was saddened by it and promised, without knowing
who might have done the deed, that the government would investigate the assassination. As events unfolded and
we pointed accusing fingers at some government officials Momoh backtracked. He said that a "special probe would
serve no useful purpose." I was sorry for him because he was in a difficult situation, the equivalent of being
between the rock and the hard place. I knew there was nothing he could do. He could not set up a commission of
inquiry on the matter by himself nor could he compel his bosses to do so. I am sure it was a sad moment for him
too. He lost a man who was like his brother in such circumstance and he could do nothing to get to the bottom of
the matter. The next challenge for him was on the burial of Dele. The family had decided that we could bury him in
Lagos. Momoh stepped into the issue and wrote a letter to me saying that by their custom eminent persons are
never buried in a foreign land. I told him it wasn't his decision but that of Dele's family. Eventually the corpse was
taken to Ugbekpe Ekperi, Dele's village, for burial because several people appealed to the family not to create a
situation where there would be a riot in Lagos if they insisted on burying him in Lagos.

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 3
                                             Tony Momoh: A Statesman

Momoh has fought many battles in his illustrious life. He challenged the Senate under the leadership of Dr. Joseph
Wayas on the issue of disclosing information received in confidence. The Senate had summoned him when he was
Editor of Daily Times to appear before it. Rather than subject himself to the possible harassment that awaited him
he took the Senate to Court asking the court to declare that a journalist had the right to withhold information that
he acquired in confidence.

Momoh, on one occasion, had challenged an armed robber who attacked him. Momoh disarmed him and took the
rifle to the police. If you needed the evidence of his courage, there it is.

His foray into politics apparently surprised many of his friends and admirers because he doesn't look like the
political type. How could the crookery in Nigeria politics have any drawing power for him? Apparently, he went into it
because of his belief in the Buhari mystique or the faith in his touted saintliness. He was Chairman of the Congress
for Progressive Change, Buhari's party which did not make any significant electoral impact. With the merger of
some parties into the APC Momoh also went along, staying by Buhari's side all the way. He made a famous
statement to the effect that if President Buhari does not perform they should be stoned. The jury is still out. Even
though the government has not performed wonderfully, no one has stoned them apparently because, as civilised
people, we do not want the Taliban punishment formula in our country. So Momoh and co have escaped the
stoning that he asked for but we have been stoning them with our tongues.

Something that has to be said about Momoh's foray into politics is that he has conducted himself decently, leaving
the established rabble rousers in his party to do their dirty business. I think everything considered Prince Tony
Momoh, journalist, lawyer and politician deserves, by his public and private conduct, to be recognised as a
statesman.

The post Tony Momoh: A Statesman appeared first on Independent Newspapers Nigeria.


Load-Date: April 23, 2019


  
