

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 3
                                                Tony Momoh: Each Man, His Time




                                      Tony Momoh: Each Man, His Time
                                                    Daily Independent (Nigeria)
                                                     February 4, 2021 Thursday



Copyright 2021 Daily Independent. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 1503 words
Byline: Temidayo Akinsuyi

Body


Prince Tony Momoh

LAGOS – The book, Each Man, His Time, subtitled, The Biography of an Era; was one of the numerous books
written by the late elderstatesman and former Minister of Information and Culture, Prince Tony Momoh, the Yerima
of Auchi kingdom who died on Monday February 1 at the age of 81.

Although the book is the chronicle of the life and times of Momoh Oshiogbele Idoah who was the Momoh the First
of Auchi Kingdom (Tony Momoh's father), it basically admonishes readers that God has created each man for a
purpose and it is best to make judicious use of the time allocated by God to each man to use on the planet.

Anyone who came in close contact with the late Momoh will testify to the fact that he had his time and he
maximized it judiciously. Born on April 27 1939, Momoh who was looking forward to celebrating his 82 birthday few
weeks away left an indelible marks in the sands of time and this was attested to by the flurry of tributes from
eminent Nigerians who mourned his passage.
     ABUJA DOCTOR REVEALS HOW MOST NIGERIA MEN ARE NOW OVERCOMING TERRIBLE BEDROOM
     PERFORMANCE DUE TO THIS BRILLIANT DISCOVERY. DON'T BE A VICTIM!

The 165th child of King Momoh I of Auchi, Tony was named Suleiman at birth but in 1955 after converting to
Christianity, he changed his name to Tony which he took after Chief Anthony Enahoro, one of Nigeria's foremost
anti-colonial and pro-democracy activists.

Momoh attended the Government School Auchi, a school founded by his father in 1922. He later moved to Anglican
School Okpe, where he served as a pupil-teacher. He also served as headmaster of the Anglican School, Ubuneke,
Ivbiaro, Owan local government area of the state. Momoh attended the Provincial Teachers Training College,
Abudu, Edo state and Government Teachers College, Abraka, Delta state. He proceeded to the University of
Nigeria, Nsukka (UNN), University of Lagos and the Nigerian Law school. He possesses degrees in mass
communication and law.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 3
                                          Tony Momoh: Each Man, His Time

He cut his teeth in journalism as a sub-editor at the Daily Times in October 1962, where he rose to become editor
and deputy general manager in 1980.

Momoh had a reputation for standing firm in the face of intimidation and he was known for fighting for press
freedom. Joseph Wayas, former senate president, once invited him to appear before the chamber over an
"uncomplimentary" and "contemptuous" publication, asking him to disclose his source of information. Momoh sued
the senate at the Lagos high court over what he described as an attempt to infringe on press freedom in the
country.

In the legal battle that ensued, Momoh argued that a journalist has the constitutional obligation to hold the
government accountable at all times. The court held that an individual had the right to refuse to disclose their
source of information.

In its ruling, an appellate court, however, stated that the 1979 constitution did not shield a journalist from disclosing
his source of information.

Later in his career, Momoh was appointed by Ibrahim Babangida, then military president, as minister of information
and culture from September 1986 until 1990. When Dele Giwa, former editor of Newswatch magazine, was killed
by a letter bomb, Momoh promised there would be a probe of his death. He later backtracked saying the probe
would serve no useful purpose. In 1996, he became a director of Newswatch.

A founding member of the Peoples Democractic Party (PDP) he was director of the Alex Ekwueme presidential
campaign organization in the 1999 presidential election . He later served as the chairman, media and publicity, of
the All Nigeria Peoples Party (ANPP). Also, he was chairman of the political committee of the Muhammadu Buhari
Organisation and national chairman of the defunct Congress for Progressive Change (CPC), one of the parties that
merged to form the All Progressives Congress (APC).

He was also the first Chairman, Independent Newspapers Limited (INL), publisher of the Daily, Saturday and
Sunday Independent titles.

Momoh had always emphasized that he never joined politics for acquisition of wealth or for position. In 2017, when
President Buhari appointed him as Chairman of the Governing Council of the University of Jos, the defunct CPC
members said they were not in agreement with the appointment, pointing out that the appointment was not befitting
of the caliber of the former Minister.

In a statement made available to newsmen in Abuja on behalf of other defunct CPC members in 17 states of the
southern region, National coordinator of Southern Mandate, Comrade Ikonomwan Francis said the appointment
"does not befit our former National Chairman of CPC and therefore we reject it in totality."

The statement reads: "We, members of the defunct Congress for Progressive Change (CPC) in the seventeen
states of the southern region in Nigeria under the auspices of southern mandate wish to express our dismay over
the appointment given to Prince Tony Momoh as the chairman Governing Council of the University of Jos.

"We want to state categorically that the appointment does not befit our former National Chairman of CPC and
therefore we reject it in totality. Prince Tony Momoh today in the ruling APC has gone far, over and above "for
himself alone" he should be given an Office or position that can empower his teaming followers and supporters
across the country.

Speaking with Daily Independent, Momoh however distanced himself from the protest and thanked President
Buhari for giving him an appointment in the academic world.According tto him, he had personally told the President
not to give him appointment in any of the boards or ministries.

He said "Someone sent me a note last week and said Buhari has been ungrateful to me. I replied him by saying
'How do you know that? Are you me? Did I ever complain to you? We must have attitude to life, which is everything
we do, we must do it to the glory of God. There are 15 million voters who gave Buhari the mandate in 2015, how

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 3
                                         Tony Momoh: Each Man, His Time

many of them can he compensate with appointments? I don't share that view that Buhari is ungrateful and that he
rewards good deeds with ingratitude at all".

Momoh, a die-hard Buharist defended the President tilI he breathed his last. In his last interview with Daily
Independent, published on January 25 2021, titled 'Buhari's Slowness Is A Strategy, Not Because Of Old Age',
Momoh had pleaded with Nigerians to cooperate with President Buhari in delivering the gains of democracy to
Nigerians.

He however said Nigerians should not hesitate to "stone the APC with votes" in 2023 if they failed to perform to
expectation.

"Buhari's slowness has nothing to do with old age but strategy. If old age limits his performance doesn't mean that
there will be no performance at all. It doesn't mean slowing down. Buhari is in control of his government and any
meeting we attend, once in comes in, you know that someone in charge has come".

President Buhari in his tribute expressed grief at the passing of his longtime ally, friend, political loyalist, saying
Prince Momoh stood with him through thick and thin, He said '"His brand of loyalty is very rare in the politics of
today. I will greatly miss him."

The President recalled that as chairman, Media and Publicity of the All Nigeria People's Party (ANPP) Campaign
Organisation in the 2003 and 2007 elections as well as Chairman of the Congress for Progressive Change (CPC),
the late Auchi Prince contributed in no small measure to the growth and strengthening of the organizations, leading
to the eventual formation of the All Progressives Congress (APC).

On his part, Chief James Onanefe Ibori, a former governor of Delta state has said that with the passing of Prince
Tony Momoh, Nigeria has lost a remarkable elder statesman.

According to him, the late Momoh was a renowned journalist, the first Chairman, Board of Directors of the
Independent Newspapers Ltd (INL), an eminent public servant, a totally detribalised Nigerian, and a pillar of the All
Progressives Congress (APC), who nevertheless, had a rewarding relationship with members of the other political
parties.

Chief Ibori said: "Though Prince Tony Momoh and I were never in the same party all through, he was civilized
enough to respect the boundaries of friendship".

Ibori recalled that he and the late Prince Momoh, who was Nigeria's Information Minister from 1986 to 1990, had a
rewarding friendship that lasted for decades. This bond became stronger when Prince Momoh graciously served as
the first Chairman, Board of Directors of the Independent Newspapers Ltd (INL).

He said that in that capacity, Tony Momoh's professionalism was on display as he reached into the great depths of
his experience and journalism prowess to help give birth to an exciting newspaper stable which introduced many
novel features into Nigerian journalism.

Chief Ibori condoled Tony Momoh's family and the Auchi Ruling House, Etsako West Local Government Area of
Edo State, for this pronounced loss and prayed that God will give them the fortitude to bear this loss and grant
Momoh's soul eternal rest.


Load-Date: February 4, 2021


  
