

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 3
                                 Nigeria 's Persecuted Press Fights Back Underground




                   Nigeria's Persecuted Press Fights Back Underground
                                                   The New York Times
                                     April 15, 1998, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final



Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company

Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1;
Length: 963 words
Byline: By HOWARD W. FRENCH


By HOWARD W. FRENCH
Dateline: LAGOS, Nigeria

Body


Every week without fail since Gen. Sani Abacha seized power in 1993, Kola Ilori has somehow managed to put out
Tell, Nigeria's most influential and combative news magazine.

For some issues this has meant scrambling to secretly reprint the magazine after an entire press run has been
seized by the country's military authorities, who routinely smash up printing shops and arrest their owners to block
publications like his. Other times it has required desperate last-minute efforts to patch together an issue after seeing
the bulk of the staff carted away in police sweeps. Once, Mr. Ilori said, he eluded capture by State Security agents
only by posing as a lowly truck loader during a police raid.

Tell is officially published in Lagos, but Mr. Ilori uses printers all over the country.

Until late last year, Mr. Ilori was mostly responsible for production matters at the magazine. But the abduction of
one of the magazine's top editors and the forced exile of another has left him virtually alone at the head of the
enterprise.

For many of its 38 years of independence from Britain, Nigeria had the freest and most diverse press in Africa. But
for the last several years, independent journalists have been arrested, beaten, forced into exile, and even
assassinated. Nigeria has experienced "the most extreme deterioration of conditions for the press in Africa,"
according to the Committee to Protect Journalists, a United States-based advocacy group.

To keep the police off balance, Mr. Ilori changes sleeping places regularly, sees little of his family, rarely uses the
same printing press for more than two weeks in a row, and meets secretly with other reporters and editors to hash
out story ideas only under the cover of religious services in churches and mosques.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                               Nigeria 's Persecuted Press Fights Back Underground

Despite its hit-and-run existence, Tell consistently manages to beat the competition, revealing details of coup plots,
tensions inside the armed forces and corruption scandals that make it a must read for the masses, the Nigerian
intelligentsia and foreign diplomats alike.

"That we come out every week is the result of sheer ingenuity," said Mr. Ilori, 48, who spoke in long and
impassioned sentences at a carefully arranged meeting place. "We have had to perfect a fleet-footed art of mobile
production. It taxes your brain, it taxes your blood, it taxes your body, but it is the only way to survive."

Each week Tell publishes a photograph of its last managing editor, Onome Osifo-Whiskey, under the stark
headline, "Where is Onimo Osifo-Whiskey?" He was abducted at his Lagos home last November as he dressed to
go to church, and has not been heard from since.

Having already spent six months in prison, Tell's editor-in-chief, Nosa Igiebor, fled the country for Britain in
November when State Security agents raided his home after the publication of an article that discussed rumors of a
serious illness afflicting General Abacha.

One well-known journalist, Christine Anyanwu, has been imprisoned since 1995 and is serving a 15-year sentence
as an "accessory to treason" for publishing a story debunking official accounts of a coup plot. Ms. Anyanwu, 46, is
reported by human rights groups to be going blind for lack of medical care.

Another reporter, Oni Egbunine, was beaten into a coma by the police last July in punishment for an article that
reported corruption by state Government officials in the provincial capital of Owerri.

As widespread as press repression has become in Nigeria, the harshest focus remains on Tell, and a small number
of competitors, among them The News and Tempo -- all known for their credibility.

Dapo Olorunyomi, Mr. Ilori's counterpart at The News, was forced to flee to the United States in 1996 after repeated
attempts to arrest him. Once he had left, security agents simply began focusing on his wife.

During the next year, Ladi Olorunyomi, a mother of two and staff member of Lagos' Independent Journalism Center,
a press training organization, was arrested twice and held for over three months without charge. Never asked about
her own work, Mrs. Olorunyomi was repeatedly interrogated about her husband's activities and whereabouts.

"If you walk through newsrooms in Nigeria they are mostly empty, because to stay at your desk is to face arrest,"
said Mrs. Olorunyomi, who fled to the United States last November. "Even the clean-up men get arrested. That is
what is happening to the press under Abacha."

Of the 17 journalists now known to be under arrest in Nigeria, 10 are from the staff of The News.

Many of the founders and top editors of Tell and The News cut their teeth at another pioneering weekly,
Newswatch, which was founded in 1985 under the previous military regime of Gen. Ibrahim B. Babangida.

Newswatch set new standards in Africa both for production values patterned after Newsweek and Time, and for a
no-holds-barred treatment of issues like Government corruption and human rights abuses.

The Babangida Government, of which General Abacha was deputy head of state, set new standards in the brutality
it was willing to use to enforce the limits on criticism.

In October 1986, less than two years after its founding, Newswatch's editor, Dele Giwa, was killed in a bomb blast
that has gone unclaimed and unpunished.

After the assassination, Newswatch dramatically softened its tone, and many of its top editors, including Mr. Ilori,
left in disenchantment.

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 3
                               Nigeria 's Persecuted Press Fights Back Underground

"The regime has grown even harder since then, but we can no longer be stopped so easily" Mr. Ilori said. "They
can seize all of our copies at six in the morning and by evening we are back on the street again because we know
that this is the last lap in a deadly race between our military rulers and the people of Nigeria.

"One or two of us may disappear, but we are prepared for survival. We cannot afford to fail."



Graphic


Photo: Tell, Nigeria's most influential news weekly, faces a campaign of harrassment and intimidation by the
Government of Gen. Sani Abacha. (Robert Grossman for The New York Times)


Map of Nigeria showing location of Lagos: The Lagos magazine Tell is published on a hit-and-run basis.


Load-Date: April 15, 1998


  
