

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 3
                                          Gideon Orkar: The man who saw tomorrow




                             Gideon Orkar: The man who saw tomorrow
                                                            The Punch
                                                   October 30, 2021 Saturday



Copyright 2021 Punch Newspapers Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 1356 words

Body


Tunde Odesola Published 27 April 2020

Tunde Odesola

Tick-tock, tick-tock, both hands of the clock tiptoed to 12 midnight. It was December 31. Hunger and anger waved
at the year, 1983, which said its goodbyes and trudged towards the calendar door. Economically, 1983 was bad for
Nigeria and her naira. The masses had nothing but the skin covering their bones. Stuffed up to the throat with
corruption, apathy and impunity, the nation held no hope for the citizenry.

But the masses were thankful. Thankful for surviving the year and the 'austerity measures' imposed by the prodigal
Shehu Shagari administration, which swept into power in October 1983 on the wings of a violent election. Like an
answer to an anxious prayer, a young Fulani soldier, Muhammadu Buhari, jumped on Dodan Barracks, Lagos, near
the stroke of midnight with his band of bumbling, self-righteous soldiers and kicked out Shagari and his focusless
National Party of Nigeria. The nation broke into wild jubilation, hugging Buhari's New Year present.

After just one year and eight months in the saddle, however, Major General Buhari was booted out of office by the
man who ran the bloodiest military junta in the history of the country, General Ibrahim Babangida. No regime in
Nigeria's history recorded a higher number of deaths of military personnel and civilian activists than Babangida's
murderous regime.

During the Babangida years, journalist Dele Giwa was shredded by a parcel bomb, over 150 senior Nigerian
military officers crashed midair and perished in a Lagos swamp; poet-soldier, Major General Mamman Vatsa, whom
Babangida was best man to, wasn't spared by the little man now marooned on Minna hilltop. Vatsa was tied to a
stake and shot to death in 1986 over an alleged coup plot along with many other brilliant soldiers. The gun of
Babangida's misrule dripped with blood.

On Sunday, April 22, 1990, about five years into Babangida's bloody rule, a junior soldier, Major Gideon Orkar, led
the most audacious coup in the annals of the country by attempting to oust the fiercely-corrupt Babangida from
power. The Orkar coup demystified Babangida, who fled, tail between legs, to Abuja, where he relocated the seat of
power to from Lagos after escaping being killed, through the courage of his ADC, Colonel UK Bello, who spirited
him and his family out of Dodan Barracks via the backdoor. Bello later returned to the barracks to face the coup

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                                    Gideon Orkar: The man who saw tomorrow

plotters but was killed inside an armoured tank. Subsequently, the coup was foiled and the plotters were arrested.
Orkar, a Tiv from Benue State, and 41 other soldiers were shot to death on July 27, 1990.

Babangida abandoned power in 1993 when he couldn't bear the local and international backlash resulting from his
cancellation of the June 12 presidential election won by the late MKO Abiola. Sani Abacha, arguably, the only major
general Babangida was taller than, later demolished the sandcastle Babangida foisted on the nation and christened
Interim National Government, side-footing the weightless leader of the ING, Ernest Shonekan, out of Aso Rock –
after just three months in power. Abacha was nothing but greed. IBB was everything but good. The lucifer of
deception embraces the devil of greed.

The Orkar coup clocked 30 years old a few days ago. So much water has passed under the Nigerian bridge. During
the coup, Nigeria was headless for many hours as senior military officers rallied troops and engaged the
revolutionary junior soldiers in a fierce battle to control Lagos. Never in its 53 years of existence had Lagos
witnessed the amount of ammunition fired on the day as soldiers fought in the trenches on April 22 through 23,
1990. Lagos went into a cardiac arrest with the heavy artillery bombardment.

After seizing power, Orkar accused the Babangida government of corruption, nepotism and killings. In his
nationwide speech, Orkar cut off Sokoto, Kano, Katsina, Borno and Bauchi from the geographical expression called
Nigeria. He said, "On behalf of the patriotic and well-meaning peoples of the Middle Belt and southern parts of this
country, I, Major Gideon Orkar, wish to inform you of the successful ousting of the dictatorial, corrupt, drug
baronish, evil man, deceitful, homosexually-centred, prodigalistic, unpatriotic administration of General Badamosi
Babangida."

He continued, "We have equally commenced their trials for unabated corruption, mismanagement of national
economy, the murders of Dele Giwa, Major-General Mamman Vasta, with other officers as there was no attempted
coup but mere intentions that were yet to materialise, and other human rights violations.

"The National Guard, already in its formative stage, is disbanded with immediate effect. Decrees Number 2 and 46
are hereby abrogated. We wish to emphasise that this is not just another coup but a well-conceived,­­ planned and
executed revolution for the marginalised, oppressed and enslaved peoples of the Middle Belt and the South.

"Our history is replete with numerous and uncontrollable instances of callous and insensitive, dominatory,
repressive intrigues by those who think it is their birthright to dominate till eternity the political and economic
privileges of this great country to the exclusion of the people of the Middle Belt and the South. They have almost
succeeded in subjugating the Middle Belt and making them voiceless and now extending (the) same to the South."

It's 30 years since Orkar and his men stormed the Dodan Barracks by 1:40am. It's 54 years since Majors
Chukwuma Nzeogu and Emmanuel Ifeajuna hatched Nigeria's first coup on January 15, 1966, killing 22 people,
including the Prime Minister, Tafawa Balewa. It's 54 years since northern officers launched a 'July Rematch'
countercoup that killed the Head of State, General JTU Aguiyi-Ironsi, and many other leaders.

However, not even during the military bloodiness did clannishness dominate governance as Nigeria is currently
witnessing under the Muhammadu Buhari regime. This is the first time in the life of Nigeria when herdsmen will kill
Middle Belt and southern Nigerian citizens while the Federal Government does absolutely nothing to check the
ethnic cleansing. It's the first time the Federal Government will openly say herdsmen are right to kill and plunder if
the Middle Belt people and southerners do not give out their lands to herdsmen for RUGA. It's also the first time that
all service chiefs and all paramilitary organisations, except two, are northerners.

World Bank President, Jim Yong Kim, disclosed in 2017 that Buhari urged the bank to concentrate development in
the northern region of Nigeria. The non-appointment of the Igbo into the National Defence Council and the National
Security Council is in breach of Section 217(3) of the constitution which says the composition of the Armed Forces
must reflect federal character.

After repeated denials, it recently came to light that northern states have long been benefiting from the Federal
Government's Conditional Cash Transfer programme while states like Lagos and Delta didn't benefit. Buhari's state,

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 3
                                    Gideon Orkar: The man who saw tomorrow

Katsina, has the highest beneficiaries with 133, 227 indigenes getting cash transfers. Katsina is followed by
Zamfara (130,764), Jigawa (99,044), Kano (84,148), Plateau (78,430), Kebbi (76,026), Kogi (62,129) and Benue
(58,943). Also, Nasarawa (48,687), Kaduna (35,348), Kwara (32,218), Gombe (26,532), Akwa Ibom (24,929), Yobe
(24,814), Bauchi (23,305) are on the list of top beneficiaries. The number of beneficiaries in Osun, Oyo and Cross
River states are 15,572, 13,811 and 11,998 respectively while Edo, Bayelsa, Rivers, Abia, Anambra and Imo have
11,368, 9,805, 9,596, 9,347, 8,105 and 7,220 beneficiaries respectively.

Babangida's administration, which Orkar sought to overthrow, clearly appears to be a saint when compared with the
Buhari regime in areas such as fairness in appointments, security and infrastructural development. Without a doubt,
Buhari's place as Nigeria's most cliquish leader is sealed in infamy and this mortal failing will be the everlasting
memoriam of his presidency. Truly, Nigeria deserves Orkar's pity. Orkar deserves a posthumous national award.


Load-Date: October 30, 2021


  
