

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                            Utomi, Falana to attend lecture in honour of #EndSARS, Dele Giwa




         Utomi, Falana to attend lecture in honour of #EndSARS, Dele Giwa
                                                            The Punch
                                                    October 17, 2021 Sunday



Copyright 2021 Punch Newspapers Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 298 words

Body


Ademola Olonilua Published 17 October 2021

Political economist and former presidential candidate, Prof. Patrick Utomi, and Human Rights lawyer, Mr Femi
Falana, are billed to attend a lecture in honour of Dele Giwa, as well as to commemorate the first anniversary of the
#EndSARS protest.

Dele Giwa was the founding editor-in-chief of Newswatch magazine. He died 35 years ago. However, the event is
organised by the African Centre for Media and Information Literacy, in partnership with Wole Soyinka Centre for
Investigative Journalism, Enough is Enough Nigeria, National Consultative Front, PLAYYA and MILID Foundation

Moreso, the event will also mark the public presentation of Remaking Nigeria: Sixty Years, Sixty Voices – a book of
60 essays by 60 young Nigerians which salutes 60 years of Nigeria's independence and points the way towards a
better country.

The #EndSARS advocacy made global headlines last October when young Nigerians across the country and in
major cities around the world embarked on protests against persistent brutality and rights violations by the Nigeria
Police Force.

The Coordinator of AFRICMIL, Chido Onumah, said in a statement, "One year after the protests and the
reprehensible violent response by the Nigerian Army which led to the death of unarmed protesters at the Lekki Toll
Gate in Lagos. It is important to cast a critical eye on that incident and see what lessons have been learnt and what
needs to be done going forward,"

Significantly, the first-year remembrance of these protests coincides with the 35th anniversary of the murder via
letter-bomb of the celebrated journalist, Dele Giwa.

"It is a measure of the acute dysfunction of the Nigerian state that till date, no one has been arrested let alone
brought to trial for this heinous crime, Onumah noted.


Load-Date: October 17, 2021

                                                                                     Page 2 of 2
                  Utomi, Falana to attend lecture in honour of #EndSARS, Dele Giwa




