

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 3
                                                Journalists At the Mercy of Gunmen




                                     Journalists At the Mercy of Gunmen
                                                      Daily Independent (Lagos)
                                                         May 3, 2010 Monday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1483 words
Byline: Joe Omokaro

Body


Barely ten days after the Nigerian Union of Journalists (NUJ) Ogun State Council, raised the alarm that lives of
journalists practising in that state were in danger, a reporter with The Nation newspapers, Edo Sule Ugbagwu, was
shot dead by unknown gunmen in Lagos.

That alarm was as a result of several threats by unknown persons and was specifically for safety of those practising
in Ogun State. However, it was incidental that the alleged threats, though not directed at journalists in other parts of
the country, had raised concerns among practitioners in neighbouring states.

Ironically, The Nation's reporter in Ogun State, Ernest Nwokolo, is among the eight journalists whose lives were
said to have been pencilled down for elimination in the state. Secretary of the Union, Wole Shokunbi, in a petition to
the Commissioner of Police (CP) in Ogun State, Musa Sani Daura, over threat to lives of journalists in the state,
noted that "journalists in the state are law abiding people who have been discharging their traditional function
without fear or favour."

Shokunbi disclosed that "Nwokolo was being trailed by some men who described themselves as security officials,"
noting that in "every rumour, there is always element of truth. Hence, we don't want to leave any chance which
necessitated our letter to your office." He urged the police boss to "look into the issue with the utmost urgency it
deserves."

The letter dated April 12, 2010, read in part:

"This is to inform you that eight of our members from Ogun State Council of the Nigeria Union of Journalists (NUJ),
have been marked for elimination by unknown assassins for reasons yet-to-be ascertained. One of the journalists,
Ernest Nwokolo of The Nation Newspaper, is being trailed by some men that described themselves as security
officials. The Nation of Friday April 9, 2010, on page three, reported the story with headline "Unknown men trail The
Nation reporter in Ogun," he attached a copy of the report as annexure.

"It was also rumoured that the other seven journalists have been marked for elimination by these unknown
assassins and in any rumour, there is always element of truth, hence we don't want to take chance which
necessitated our letter to your office.

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 3
                                        Journalists At the Mercy of Gunmen

We are using this medium by calling on you to use your good offices to look into this issue with the utmost urgency
it deserves.

"Journalists in Ogun State are law abiding people, who have been discharging their traditional function without fear
of favour. We have never engaged in blackmail and have been accurate, objective and sincere in reportage of
events. Also, our constructive criticisms have helped in nurturing the country into the present democratic
dispensation.

Sir, we are appealing to your command to save our soul from this scenario."

But the questions begging for answers are that: Has the CP taken any step to guarantee the lives of the armless
journalists or he waved off the threats as mere propaganda? If he has taken some steps, how many people has he
quizzed in respect of the petition? The fear is anchored on the fact that investigations into previous gruesome
murder of journalist have never seen the light of the day. The case of Dele Giwa, founding Editor-in-chief of
Newswatch magazine, killed in 1986, readily stands out in this regard. His killers are yet to be known and
prosecuted.

However, Sani Daura, who acknowledged receipt of the petition by the Ogun State council of NUJ, assured the
safety of the journalists.

Daily Independent Correspondent in Ogun State, Segun Adeleye, who incidentally, is one of those whose life is
being threatened, reported that Daura, acknowledged the petition at the Eleweran, the police command
headquarters, Abeokuta, the state capital, while fielding questions from journalists on Wednesday April, 21.

As an assurance of protecting the lives of the journalists, he promised to detail a patrol van around the vicinity of
"Iwe-Iroyin House," the operational base of the journalists.

But that assurance is still a shadow, because he said proper action will not be taken until the Inspector-General of
Police (IGP), Ogbonna Onovo, visits Ogun State or approves his request.

His words: "We are working on that. As soon as the Inspector-General comes around and approves of same, we
shall act swiftly to detail a patrol vehicle around the council secretariat," the Police Commissioner assured.

However, Daura said that in the interim, he has "detailed the Assistant Commissioner of Police in charge of
operations and the Divisional Police Officer (DPO) to do something as fast as possible."

"Like any other segment of the society, we shall provide adequate cover for the NUJ members, it is an important
segment to us, because we can neither be heard nor be seen without you," the CP said.

Detailing a patrol van within the premises where the journalists operate is not enough to guarantee their safety,
concerned analysts have said. "Will the police van escort them to various professional assignments? Will the police
provide security for them at their homes? What happens to them during their leisure times?" an obviously infuriated
editor of a Lagos based national daily asked.

Observers insist rather that there should be police foot patrol in every street of major cities and towns. The
policemen should be armed with communication gadgets to effectively curtail heinous crimes such as the
assassination of journalists and other prominent Nigerians, they added.

SSS Invites NUJ Executive

While the police are giving shadow protection to the journalists, the Department of State Security Service has
invited the Executives of the Ogun State Council of the Nigeria Union of Journalists (NUJ), to throw more light on
the petition, alleging threat to lives of select members of the union by yet-to-be identified men. Secretary to the
Council, Comrade Wole Sokunbi, who signed the petition on behalf of the members, after her special congress,
obliged the SSS on Wednesday April 21 and Friday 23, when he responded to their invitation at the Oke-Mosan
office of the security operatives.

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 3
                                       Journalists At the Mercy of Gunmen

The Secretary said the SSS operatives told him to report any "strange movements around his members" to them.
The invitation is coming after four men in an unmarked Peugeot 406 trailed the Correspondent of the Independent
titles, first from Abiola Way/Olorunsogo on Tuesday and later to Oke-Aregba area, close to his residence.

The unmarked car is one of the various vehicles carrying either Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) number plate or
OGD Vanguard or no number at all, whose occupiers could not be ascertained.

Similarly, two men on motorcycles, popularly called okada rode from the Kugba/Oke-Aregba axis of Abeokuta, the
state capital, last Sunday, pointing to the residence of the Correspondent.

While Shokunbi and his team were answering questions from men of the SSS, back at the head office of The
Nation newspapers in Lagos, unknown to Nwokolo, the life of his colleague, Ugbagwu was also in danger. If
Ugbagwu had taken cognizance that the threat to his colleagues in Ogun State could be extended to others in
Lagos and to other parts of the country, he would have probably taken precaution.

Vanguard Reporter Escapes Death

Apart from those in Ogun State whose lives are being threatened, a reporter with the Vanguard newspaper in Benin
City, Edo State capital, Simon Ebegbulem, also raised the alarm that his life was in danger.

According to him, on Monday, April 26, at about 8.30p.m after closing for the day's job was going home, but noticed
a car trailing him from Sapele Road, Benin, to Adesuwa and to Ugbor Road where he lives. He said, he had to
double his speed in an effort to escape from his assailants, but rammed his car into a gate causing him head injury
and his car badly damaged.

Many, in fact, consider the murder of Sule Ugbagwu as one too many against journalists in the country, as a way to
cow them from being upright in the discharge of their noble and dignified profession.

About six months ago, another journalist with The Guardian, Bayo Ohu, was murdered in similar circumstance. In
February, Lagos State CP, Marvel Akpoyibo, paraded two people in connection to Ohu's murder.

Elimination of journalists as last resort to cover up misdeeds or for selfish purpose, only paints a picture of a
barbaric and lawless society and a failed state.A society that abhors the truth and uprightness but thrives in
corruption, greed and ignoble activities will end up experiencing retrogression in all spheres.

The gruesome murder of journalists and other prominent Nigerians without getting the real killers is a challenge to
the country's national security, it has been suggested.

Government should live to its responsibility of providing adequate security for its citizens and mete out punishment
to any violator of the laws of the land, no matter how highly placed or protected with artificial immunity, analysts
insist.


Load-Date: May 4, 2010


  
