

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 4
       Unresolved Cases of Extra-Judicial Killings - So Far, So Bad - Mohammed Bello Adoke, AGF [analysis]




  Unresolved Cases of Extra-Judicial Killings - So Far, So Bad - Mohammed
                       Bello Adoke, AGF [analysis]
                                                      Daily Independent (Lagos)
                                                       May 5, 2010 Wednesday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 2421 words
Byline: Adam Adedimeji And Francis Famoroti

Body


Despite the existence of the international human rights treaty obligations and the Constitution, Nigerian security
agents and unknown gunmen continue to violate human rights norms that guarantee the dignity of life and human
persons.

Both Sections 33 and 34 of the 1999 Constitution clearly made execution lawful only if ordered by a constitutionally
empowered institution, authority or person or in circumstances envisaged by the Constitution. It, therefore, follows
that any other method other than the constitutionally recognised means of depriving one life is not only
unconstitutional, illegal, but also unlawful and nothing but extrajudicial. Evidence of accidental discharges,
assassinations, killings of innocent citizens and disregard for human life by paid assassins, however, abounds.
observe that notwithstanding the provisions in the criminal and penal codes and the nation's criminal justice system,
a large percentage of extra-judicial killings and cases arising from assassinations and murders in the country has
remained unresolved.

Article 3 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that "everyone has the right to life, liberty and security
of person". Article 4 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights states "Human beings are inviolable.
Every human being shall be entitled to respect for his life and the integrity of his person. No one shall be arbitrarily
deprived of this rights." The provision is also replicated in Article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights thus , "Every human being has the inherent right to life. This right shall be protected by law. No one
shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life."

By extension, the 1999 Constitution of Nigeria recognises the fact that human life is sacrosanct. Section 33(1) of the
constitution provides that "Every person shall have a right of life, and no one shall be deprived intentionally of his
life, save in execution of the sentence of a court in respect of a criminal offence of which he has been found guilty in
Nigeria". Prior to the inauguration of the 1999 constitution, all the previous constitutions beginning from the 1960
Independence constitution had provided for the right to life of all citizens.

In spite of the universal protection against extra-judicial killings provided for in various human rights instruments,
incidence of these criminal acts have become more pronounced in the country.

Many innocent souls including those of the mighty and the lowly had been wasted over the years and personalities
who would have emerged as future leaders had been sent to the world beyond through extra-judicial killings.

                                                                                                 Page 2 of 4
      Unresolved Cases of Extra-Judicial Killings - So Far, So Bad - Mohammed Bello Adoke, AGF [analysis]

The Nigeria Police became even more repressive and some of these acts could be linked to them as they continue
to violate with impunity the treaty obligations entered into by Nigeria with other countries.

Indeed, extra-judicial killings and assassinations in the country dated back to the 1970s, when a United States-
based Nigerian sprinter, Dele Udoh, was killed at a checkpoint in Lagos. Since then, several other extra-judicial
killings had taken place in the country.

Some of these killings were perpetrated at the checkpoints by the police while others by assassins and killer-
squads.

In the early 1980s, two Dawodu brothers were killed extra-judicially by a police cop, Ezeh Ibe, at Anikantamo
Square on Lagos Island, and a businessman, Mr. Obuseh, was also gunned down in Surulere, Lagos by unknown
persons. Years later, the founding Editor-in-Chief and Chief Executive of Newswatch Magazine, Dele Giwa, was
killed by parcel bomb in October 1986; a female journalist and former treasurer,

Lagos State Council, Nigeria Union of Journalists, Bolade Fasasi, was also killed in Ibadan by unidentified persons
sometime in 1999.

The military men also were not spared by unknown gunmen and the list of big wigs and ex-top functionaries killed
extra-judicially included, Admiral Mufutau Elegbede (rtd), a Naval chief, Akinterinwa, Group Capt. Anthony
Ikhazoboh, (rtd), and Col. Rindam among others.

A member of the Osun State House of Assembly, Odunayo Olagbaju, representing Ife Central Constituency, was
murdered on December 19, 2001 while a couple of days later,

December 23, 2001, former Attorney General of the Federation and Justice Minister, Chief Bola Ige, was killed by
assassins at his Bodija residence, Ibadan. The killings which shook the whole nation were linked to the lingering
feud in Osun State politics.

Of course, elder statesman, Pa Alfred Rewane, was assassinated in his GRA, Ikeja residence in October 1995.
There were the killings of other notable activists and politicians, like Chiefs Dikibo, Harry Marshal, Suliat Adedeji,
Funso Williams and some months ago of Dipo Dina.

Equally remarkable was the murder of six traders in Abuja otherwise known as 'the Apo Six' by the police at a
checkpoint.

In the last few years, a number of journalists, Tunde Oladepo of the Guardian, Omololu Falobi of JAAIDS, Godwin
Agbroko and Abayomi Ogundeji both of THIS DAY, Bayo Ohu of the Guardian and lately, Edo Sule Ugbagwu of the
Nation were killed extra-judicially at different times by unknown persons. Two Plateau State-based journalists were
also murdered about the same time Ugbagwu was killed on April 24, 2010.

Save for the killer of the Dawodu brothers in Lagos Island who was immediately arrested, tried, convicted,
sentenced by the High Court and later freed by the Supreme Court, the common thread that runs through other
series of extra-judicial killings is either that the suspected killers were not caught, there was tardy prosecution of the
accused persons, and in most instances, the cases were yet to be resolved by the courts.

In some of these criminal cases, the prosecution had given up due to inadequate evidence to establish the charges
against the suspects and yet in others, the cases were bungled, prompting the courts to set free the suspects.
Some of the cases are equally pending before the courts.

But the sole question often being asked by the ordinary citizen is that why it has proved difficult to resolve some of
these murder cases and thereby secure the conviction of the suspects. The answer is obviously blowing in the
wind, as the Federal Government for example, could not successfully prosecute the suspects linked with the killing
of the ex-Attorney General of the Federation.

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 4
      Unresolved Cases of Extra-Judicial Killings - So Far, So Bad - Mohammed Bello Adoke, AGF [analysis]

A Lagos Lawyer, Mr. Steve Adaramoye, said "extra-judicial killings in the country are prevalent because of
lawlessness. Because the rule of law has not been fully entrenched in the country people take laws in their hands.
Rule of law is the adjunct of democracy. This type of extra-judicial killings that we all know is very common with the
police at the police stations and checkpoints. During the torture of suspects at the police stations, the police have
killed a lot of the suspects. At times in the course of extracting information and confession from the suspects, the
suspects are killed. We all know that at times, the Police will arrest suspects without warrant or recourse to law and
in the process, they kill extra-judicially. You cannot condemn someone until a prima facie case is established
against him. In some cases, where the court has convicted as in Nafiu Bello's case, execution warrant is hurriedly
executed while appeal is pending. At the level of the executive, we usually have extra-judicial killings of innocent
people. It is however not as notorious as that of the police.

Of course, what happened in Boko Haram is another instance of extra-judicial killings, the same goes for the killings
of Apo Six in Abuja.

I hope with enlightenment, the Police will reduce the tide of these killings and there should be speedy prosecution of
suspects arrested for this crime and other related offences.

Another Lawyer, Chief Oladimeji Longe, said "The type of extra- killings we see in the country today are politically
motivated killings. Some of the extra-judicial killings are from the authority above, so it will be difficult to investigate
them. You don't expect a slave to investigate his master. If extra-judicial killing ahs no political motive, it must
provide a basis for its investigation. In some cases no disputes are visible, it is just an attack.

The extra-judicial killings are off-shoot of bad leadership of the military in the past years. They were introduced
when the military made incursions into politics.

The soldiers are to protect the territorial integrity of the country but they have abandoned their responsibility.
Soldiers in khaki are not different from the ones in Agbada. Generals Obasanjo, Babangida, Buhari and Col.
Oyinlola may be in politics now; they are still soldiers who ruled in the past. A leper will never change his colours.
Soldiers are branded with cruelty and they cannot make good democratic leaders.

In his own submission, Mr. Kelvin Okoroafor, a lawyer said "extra-judicial killings have to do with the national
security problem. There are lapses everywhere and this casts doubt on the integrity of the government. The
government still makes excuses and it never admits any responsibility. If government is serious, they should
appreciate our successes and our failures. Extra-judicial killings and the inability to get to the root of many of them
are our failures as a nation. The problem lies at the door of the police. The Police Act prescribes that the police has
responsibility for the security of the country. It is the primary function of the police to investigate crimes, by
extension all the cases of extra-judicial killings are supposed to be investigated by the police. But because the
Police are doing their work properly, the politicians in charge of the affairs of the country are not showing
responsibility. The Political leaders and the Police should show sense of responsibility and the political will to
discharge their duties effectively.

We cannot really fault the government lawyers in charge of prosecution of the cases arising from extra-judicial
killings because the prosecution works on evidence. There is hardly anything a prosecutor can do in the absence of
evidence referred to him by the police. The government should address all theses peculiarities so that it can
prosecute and resolve some of the extra judicial killings in the country."

Basically the police have the power to detect crimes in the society and in the process, they could resort to stop and
search at the checkpoints. The law also allows them to use reasonable force to arrest suspects.

An instance of detection of crime at a checkpoint was the discovery of the head of a boy, Ikechukwu Okoronkwo,
murdered and beheaded which led to riots in Owerri and became the celebrated 'Otokoto trials' in Imo State some
years ago.

In his paper "Execution and Unlawful Termination of Life in Nigeria", Norrison Quakers, attributed the menace to
lack of adequate training for our police as well as absence of criminal justice policy.

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 4
      Unresolved Cases of Extra-Judicial Killings - So Far, So Bad - Mohammed Bello Adoke, AGF [analysis]

"As a country, we have no criminal justice policy. Our policemen are inadequately trained; they have no instructions
on the use of force, no adequate resources and equipment to combat crime, high level of corruption in our various
prosecutorial agencies, existence of the culture of impunity and the lack of accountability, no respect or regard for
the sanctity of life, slow and ineffective criminal justice administration with poor and obsolete criminal justice
apparatus," he said.

Quakers however proffers a way out. Presenting what he considered as a way forward, Quakers said, "The Police
Act and Regulations and other enabling laws of prosecutorial and enforcement agencies should be reviewed,
particularly as regards the use of force. This should be done in line with international human rights law and
standards. As a country, we should criminalize torture, extrajudicial execution and unlawful killings and enforced
disappearances of prisoners. A witness protection programme ought to be established and all persons arrested for
whatever offence must be registered in a criminal registry, accessible to the public on application or request. All
agencies of government saddled with the responsibility of arresting, detaining or prosecuting offenders must be
adequately funded, trained and equipped for the responsible use of force and firearms in line with international
human rights standards. A system should be in place for compensation of families of victims and their dependants.
Any officer found to have ordered or participated in the implementation of unlawful termination of life or extrajudicial
killing should not only be dismissed but must also be prosecuted. The Duty Solicitors' Scheme and the Human
Rights Desk presently in place and being practiced in some states of the Federation should extend to other states,
as this will help in checkmating and curtailing human rights violations, including extrajudicial killings and enforced
disappearance of suspects. Custodial centers must have proper record keeping, as opposed to the archaic and
obsolete practice of writing with chalk, names of inmates in custodial environment, on the wall, which can be easily
erased, leaving no trace, in this age of information technology."

He said further that the authorities, agencies and persons empowered to carry and use firearms must give and be
made accountable to an independent body, "where allegations of excessive use of force occasioning constitutional
infractions are made against any of such persons or agencies by families of victims or civil society organizations."

Like Quakers, George Amadi of Faculty of Law, University of Nigeria, Enugu, campus ascribed the crime on the
incivility of police officers at checkpoints.

The university don in a paper titled 'The Impact of Police Checkpoints on Crimes and Community in Nigeria'
delivered at the National Summit on Crime and Policing In Nigeria in 2004, stated that the power of stop and search
as embodied in Section 4 of the Police Act tended to bring about the desired effect if conducted by officers who
have adequate police personality.

"If checkpoints are to have any meaningful impact on crime and community, then the need for various command
checkpoints to exchange and coordinate intelligence cannot be overemphasised," Amadi said.

Granted that the Police could occasionally abuse their powers at the checkpoints and their police stations, it
behoves on the high command of the Police structure to always ensure senior officers put their subordinates to
check while over-stepping their bounds in the course of their duty.


Load-Date: May 6, 2010


  
