

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 2
                                           'How Govt Can Unmask Dele Giwa's Killers'




                              'How Govt Can Unmask Dele Giwa's Killers'
                                                             Vanguard (Lagos)
                                                             October 20, 2016



Copyright 2016 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 608 words
Byline: Charles Kumolu and David Okpe

Body


The thirtieth anniversary of the assassination of the founding Editor-in-Chief of Newswatch Magazine, Mr. Dele
Giwa provided an opportunity for Nigerians to urge the Federal Government to declassify the outcome of the
various investigations into the matter, noting that doing so would easily unmask those behind the gruesome murder.

It was also an avenue to demand that the case be included among those to be reinvestigated in line with a recent
directive by President Muhammadu Buhari for the re-opening of all unresolved high-profile assassinations in
Nigeria.

At the event, which was convened, yesterday in Lagos, by the Lagos State chapter of the Nigeria Union of
Journalists, NUJ, attendees unanimously said unravelling Giwa's killers would not be a challenge considering the
availability of reports on the issue especially the position of Oputa Panel on human rights violations.

Those at the forum, entitled: 'Safety of Journalists and the Culture of Impunity in Africa', include the Lagos State
governor, Mr. Akinwumi Ambode, who was represented by the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Information
and Strategy, Mr. Fola Adeyemi; Lagos State Police Commissioner, Mr. Fatai Owoseni; House of Representatives
member, Mr. Sani Zoro; President, Nigerian Guild of Editors, NGE, Mrs. Funke Egbemode; General
Manager/Editor-in-Chief of Vanguard Newspapers, Mr. Gbenga Adefaye; human rights lawyer, Mr. Femi Falana,
SAN, who was represented by Mr. Malachy Ugwumadu and co-founders of Newswatch Magazine, Messrs. Ray
Ekpu, Yakubu Mohammed and Dan Agbese.

Others are Mr. Dare Babarinisa; Second Vice President of Nigerian Bar Association, NBA, Mr. Monday Ubani;
President of Tell Communications, Mr. Nosa Igiebor; Executive Secretary of Dele Giwa Foundation, Mr. Richard
Akinnola; Deputy Managing Director of Thisday Newspapers, Mr. Kayode Komolafe; Managing Director/Editor-in-
Chief of The Sun Newspapers, Mr. Eric Osagie; wife of the deceased, Mrs. Funmi Giwa; daughter of the deceased,
Miss Aisha Giwa and a younger brother of the late journalist, Mr. Tunde Giwa, among others.

Falana tasks media

In his remarks, Falana, who was the guest speaker, urged journalists to keep the issue on the front burner to enable
the police unmask those behind the act which happened on October 19, 1986.

Dele's death touched our family -- Brother

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                                    'How Govt Can Unmask Dele Giwa's Killers'

On his part, Dele Giwa's younger brother, Tunde Giwa, said: "It is my believe that keeping his memory alive in this
manner would keep the issue alive. That is why we came up with the Dele Giwa Foundation. I have to thank Funmi,
she is the only one I know as Dele Giwa's wife. The death of Dele Giwa touched our family in a negative way
because he was the only one we had.

"I want to beg the media not to let the death go like that. We still want justice to be done because we all know the
person responsible. I can even mention the person's name. Gani Fawehimi told me that even if it will take 50 years,
we must ensure the killer is brought to book."

FG should reopen case--Ekpu

On his part, Ekpu said: "We issued a statement indicating that the government should reopen the investigation into
the case. We stand by our position. All of us here are collective widows, it is not just Funmi and Dele's brothers who
were made widows by that dastardly act of 30 years ago. The perpetrators thought the issue would be quickly done
and forgotten but it was quickly done but has not been forgotten. Books have been written on it, positions have
been taken, we must not forget that a lot of Nigerians have been killed and the killers have not been brought to
justice. That is why we must ensure that the killers are brought to book."


Load-Date: October 20, 2016


  
