

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 2
                                      Dimgba Igwe: Nigeria and the hit-and-run syndrome




                      Dimgba Igwe: Nigeria and the hit-and-run syndrome
                                                           Nigerian Tribune
                                                     September 12, 2014 Friday



Copyright 2014 African Newspapers of Nigeria Limited All Rights Reserved

Length: 924 words

Body


NIGERIA has always been a victim of hit and run. From politicians who rob us blind and run away at the slightest
mention of "fellow countrymen," only to come back after the dust had settled seeking to seize another chance of
looting, to Liberian diplomats who come into the country bringing Ebola, sneaking away from quarantine,
resurfacing in Port-Harcourt, infecting more victims and disappearing into thin air. Hit and run.

This is a country where Boko Haram seems to have come to stay, gnawing at our Achille's heels and hiding in
Sambisa forest after perpetrating attacks against military bases and escaping with ammunition. They even
abducted more than 200 of our girls and boasted they would sell them in the open market as if they were goats. We
only mourned and hope we would one day bring back our girls while the criminals remain at large. Hit and run.

So when the news broke that veteran journalist, Dimgba Igwe had died while jogging somewhere near his house,
killed by a hit and run driver, the first thing that came to mind was hit and run again? But then, at what time of the
day did it happen? Weren't there some passers-by who saw what happened, someone who could offer immediate
help?

Unfortunately the tragedy took place at about 10am in broad daylight. 10 am? One would have thought it happened
in an exclusive and deserted area but no. So how come the crazy driver did the havoc and was fast enough to
escape from the scene? Was nobody around at 10am?

In saner climes, a CCTV camera might not have captured the image of the driver but would have definitely given us
picture of his vehicle, the colour and probably the registration number anything which could have helped the police
trace the culprit. Though the police have vowed to arrest the offender, that is a hard sell, something in the mould of
finding out who killed Dele Giwa.

As is often the case in journalism, whenever there is a similar tragedy, close relations and friends are the best bet to
give a true picture of who the deceased was. Many people may not know Dimgba Igwe's wife or siblings but there is
one person whom many know as his next of kin, in fact his 'twin brother': Mike Awoyinfa. He did not disappoint in
his tribute to his soul mate.

From Awoyinfa's tribute one could see that Dimgba Igwe was a good man. "... the Dimgba Igwe I know, will forgive
the man who killed him," Awoyinfa wrote adding that: "Pastor Igwe must have prayed that morning. His first act at
the break of every new day is to go on his knees. He sings in praise of God, blesses the name of the Lord, speaks
in tongue and prays for the Lord to deliver him from all evils. But on that Black Saturday, the devil struck."

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 2
                                 Dimgba Igwe: Nigeria and the hit-and-run syndrome

Obviously bad things happen to good people. Many have asked: 'why do bad things happen to good people? but
nobody has been able to provide a precise answer. However, what is clear is that bad things actually happen to
good people. Awoyinfa's tribute also shed more light on the final hours of Igwe: "For four hours, he was bleeding on
the road to Golgotha. No ambulance. No oxygen mask. No Samaritan hospital. From St. Raphael Hospital to the
General Hospital Isolo where there was no surgeon to attend to him, it was the story of Nigeria's systemic failure as
a country. He finally gave up at Lagos State University Hospital, Ikeja."

Even in cosmopolitan Lagos with ambulances stationed at strategic places, Igwe's life could not be saved. In other
climes, you only need to dial 911 and an ambulance would surface but here there was no ambulance, even the
available ones could be held somewhere in the thick Lagos traffic. What a shame.

Dreams die fast. Now all the future that Igwe and his 'twin brother' envisaged together had vanished into thin air.
The expected launch of their 50 World Editors, a book put together in the course of their travels together as editors
has been stalled.

ack to the question: Why do bad things happen to good people? This is actually a question based on Harold S.
Kushner's book: When Bad Things Happen To Good People. The book is an attempt by the author to make human
beings see or make meaning out of sufferings and losses. To know that God is not the author of tragedies and that
even when tragedies happen, God is there and the negative situation could turn around through personal will and
determination and that which we think is a catastrophe, is actually a stepping stone to greater heights and better
things.

The tragedy with the Nigerian situation is that the causes of the Dimgba Igwe's death would never be used to turn
things around. The status quo ante remains and life continues until another tragedy occurs, more tragic than Igwe's.
No lessons learnt.

Crazy drivers will continue to overspeed in residential areas where in better climes there would be road signs
stating the speed limit allowed in specific areas. New estates would spring up where residents are not taken into
considerations in terms of planning and design. Pedestrians will continue to struggle with motorists and okada
riders for right of way. In nearby Cotonou, motorbikes have their own small road specifically designed for them in
other places pedestrians have their own 'road' too. Not here in the country that prides itself as 'the giant of Africa.'

Predictably more hit and run drivers would continue to operate. Hit and run drivers such as oil thieves, pipeline
vandals, scammers all sorts of characters who are never caught people whose toes are too sacred to be stepped
on.

Alade is on the staff of the Nigerian Tribune. (bayoalade@yahoo.com


Load-Date: September 16, 2014


  
