

                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 5
                                                        BOOKS OF Revelation




                                                 BOOKS OF Revelation
                                                           The Sun (Nigeria)
                                                   September 23, 2014 Tuesday




Copyright 2014 The Sun Publishing Limited Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. (Syndigate.info) All Rights Reserved




Length: 2655 words
Byline: CHIKA ABANOBI

Body


In Mike Awoyinfa’s memorable tribute to Dimgba Igwe, a tribute that brought tears to the eyes of many readers, he,
had written, among other emotional things
The post BOOKS OF Revelation appeared first on The Sun News.

In Mike Awoyinfa’s memorable tribute to Dimgba Igwe, a tribute that brought tears to the eyes of many readers, he,
had written, among other emotional things, about books he bought for him, while he was in Ipswich, London, to
attend his son’s Master degree graduation ceremony. It was there that the tragic news of Dimgba’s death was
broken to him.

At the moment, they have become books which, to all intents and purposes, to use a common English
cliché, Dimgba will never get to read.

They include: Thurston Clarke’s JFK’s Last Hundred Days, Richard Branson’s The Virgin Way and Desmond Tutu’s
God Is Not A Christian. “He was so excited,” Awoyinfa noted in the tribute. “He was waiting for the books. He loved
books. Now, the evil forces have brought him to book.”

In an emotional chat with Education Review, last Tuesday, Awoyinfa made mention of the books while expressing
his regrets that Dimgba, his twin-brother from a different mother, will never get to read those books.

“On the eve of his death, that is, a day before he died, I had told him the books I bought for him,” Awoyinfa said,
matter-of-factly. “He was so excited. He was looking forward to receiving them. I mean, the joy of our traveling is the
books we buy. He was looking forward to getting these books. But it is very sad that he will never get to read them.”

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 5
                                                BOOKS OF Revelation

His mention of the books he buys from big-time bookshops in the course of their travels, or, he buys for Dimgba, as
in this case, makes you to ask how they find time to read, given their very busy schedules. You start with him first
before zeroing in on Dimgba. “Well, it depends on how a book engages me,” he says. “On the day before Dimgba
died, I was reading a book on Mike Tyson, The Undisputed Truth. It is his autobiography. The book so engaged me
so much that all the projects I aimed at doing and the chapters that I intended writing during the holiday, I didn’t
have time for them.

How Awoyinfa and Dimgba read and write

“I read and read and read. I am a Mike Tyson’s fan, as bad as he is. He’s my hero; I have written so much about
him. The book gave me an opportunity to want to explore some things I didn’t know about Mike Tyson. I was bent
on finishing that book before this tragedy struck. So it all depends on how interesting the subject is. If the subject is
very interesting, I start from the beginning. But if it is not, I select from relevant chapters because I don’t have time.
Time is very precious. I don’t have time for fiction. I wished I have time for that. Since I am in the business of
biography writing, I must see what others have written and if a story interests me then I begin to follow the style and
know what it is that interests me so that I can also adapt. Usually, whatever I write is influenced by what I read.

“I can read from the back or middle of a book. But Dimgba hardly does that. If he is determined to read any book,
he starts from the beginning to the end. He is very, very meticulous about reading. The subjects that interest him
are the hard issues, memoirs of people like Hilary Clinton. Anything on Hilary Clinton, he would read. The same
with any book by reputed investigative journalist writing on any subject they have investigated, behind-the-scenes,
you know. Those are the things that interest him. He researches a lot. He is a very, very intelligent guy. Take
Dimgba on any subject, he doesn’t need to prepare. He will always have something to say.”

As with their intellectual/literary “inputs” (reading) so is with their outputs (writings). There is no disputing the fact
that voracious reading has made Dimgba and Awoyinfa prodigious and prolific writers. The evidence is there, right
from their first book, The Art of Feature Writing, to their last one just published, on their interviews with a collection
of world editors, fifty of them.

“That book is already at the wharf and we are clearing it,” he tells you. “It was printed in India. Most companies in
England print in China and India. They give you high quality and world-standard printing. It is a book that took us
about ten years to write. In the course of our IPI (International Press Institute) trips, we made sure we looked for big
names in journalism and big editors. Whenever any editor comes to the conference to give a lecture or to
participate in a symposium, our duty is to pin the editor down after his lecture and ask journalism-oriented questions
about his life and times in journalism.

“The bigger the newspaper the bigger our interest. We interviewed editors from New York Times, Chicago Times,
Tribune, Washington Post, New York Post, New York Newsday, The Times of London, The Sun of London,
Financial Times, virtually every newspaper in the world. All of them are represented in that book. That book should
be the Bible of journalism to anyone who has interest because it talks about the experiences, the memoirs of the
journalist, from 50 journalists all over the world. It is one book that will really make us proud. Anyone who wants to
reach great heights in journalism has to get that book because that book is full of experiences and nothing can beat
experience. Experience is the best teacher. And here you have 50 celebrated journalists from all over the world,
including Nigeria, sharing their experiences in journalism, telling you the adventures they embarked on in their
search for news. I think it is a treasure trove for every journalist.

“In Nigeria, we featured Alhaji Babatunde Jose and Segun Osoba who is the best investigative journalist ever in
the history of Nigeria. Then the first Nigerian journalist to win a Pulitzer prize, Dele Olojede, is there. Bayo
Onanuga, the MD of The News is also there. Nigeria is ably represented by the best. Of course, there is the
publisher of ThisDay, Nduka Obaigbena. He also has a very inspiring story to tell. Some people are asking: why is
Mike Awoyinfa and Dimgba Igwe, not featured in the book? I said how can we be featured in our own book? It is
very, very unethical. But the crowning jewel of that book is Harold Matthew Evans (editor of the British The Sunday
Times, 1967 to 1981).

                                                                                                          Page 3 of 5
                                                BOOKS OF Revelation

“He is the man who is the editors’ editor. He is number one journalist of all times in England. He was sacked by
Rupert Murdoch, the world-famous publisher and media mogul. Or, he rather resigned when he could no longer live
with what he perceived as his constant interference in the running of the paper. Thereafter, he went over to USA to
really rebuild his life. He wrote books. The American Century is one of the books he wrote – the book on the history
of America from the perspective of inventors, people who made America. It is a great book. I have it in my library.
Harold Evans is a man that every journalist should emulate. He is the Mandela of journalism, a professional editor.
We met him and interviewed him. His interview is in that book.

Fashola’s Biography

“There is also the biography on Fashola, the governor of Lagos State. It is a book, I co-authored, as usual with
Dimgba. That one is ready and is with Fashola. And, I am sure he will soon approve it. He’s been very busy. He
didn’t have time to go through it. But I heard he is going through it and in the next couple of weeks or months the
book should be out.

“That man is a case study in good leadership. He is a man that people should study his leadership style. His story is
very, very inspiring. He is a man who was born and his father initially rejected him. But later he came back to accept
the child. He met the mother in the United Kingdom. From that background he studied very hard and grew up to
become a governor. Fashola’s story is a very inspiring one. It wasn’t that he was a genius from the beginning.
There was a time he wasn’t even doing well at school and his father threatened that he was going to withdraw him
from school and make him go and learn mechanic job. But that was the turning point in the boy’s life when he felt he
was blowing it. He re-engineered his life and from there he became a better person.

“All our lives it’s been book, book and Dimgba was my writing partner. He was my editor. We really complemented
each other. We’ve come a long way from the days of Dele Giwa. I mean, our style synchronises with each other.
He knows where I am coming from and I know where he is coming from. He complements my weakness and I
complement his.”

Inside the books Awoyinfa bought for Dimgba

That brings us to a very important question: what is inside the books that Awoyinfa bought for Dimgba, the books he
will never get to read? Let’s start with JFK’s Last Hundred Days, by Thurston Clarke. Like Awoyinfa and Igwe,
Clarke, educated at Yale University, Columbia University and the School of Oriental and African Studies, London, is
an American historian, author and journalist. But talking about his book, it is one that Dimgba who is said by
Awoyinfa to love books on hard issues like politics and political figures would have loved to read, from cover to
cover.

The book focuses, among other issues, anecdotal events and incidents, on President JF Kennedy’s efforts and
achievements towards ending the Cold War between the East, represented by Communist Russia and China and
the West, represented by USA and its allies, passing the Civil Rights Act and withdrawing US troops from Vietnam.
One of the fascinating accounts is his grief at the death of his infant son, Patrick, a grief which drew him closer to
his wife, Jackie, and led to his renewed determination to be a good husband and father, and his battle with his ill
health. The book provides us also with interesting narratives and encounters on the widespread and enduring grief
following his assassination, a grief much like the one we are going through right now on the untimely death of
Dimgba Igwe.

But believe it or not, that is The Virgin Way. So says Sir Richard Nicholas Branson, the English business magnate
and investor, founder of Virgin Group, which comprises more than 400 companies, the man who dropped out of
school at the age of sixteen and never cared to go back, the man, one out of four Britons, according to polls, is said
to have chosen as their “dream boss.”

The book he is said to have written without reading any business or motivational book, is filled, not only with his life-
time experiences, but also with memorable statements like: “«Turn off that laptop and iPhone and get your derrière
out there»; «Delegate and spend more time with your family»; “if you hire the wrong person at the top of a
company, they can destroy it in no time at all»; “Leadership is not about you. It’s about inspiring and enabling others

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 5
                                                BOOKS OF Revelation

to do their absolute best together to realize a meaningful and rewarding shared purpose. Be BRAVE. Delegate. And
spend more time with your family”; “You’ll never have to think outside the box if you refuse to let anyone build one
around you”; «A business is simply coming up with an idea to improve other people’s lives and, hopefully, when you
have done that, more money will come in than goes out.”

He does not have what you can call an office, he tells you, where he can sit, like other bosses do, and workers
would come to see him for one reason or the other, or at his invitation or summon. Rather he prefers going round
his businesses to see them where they work as to know their problems, challenges and progress.

Strong leaders, Branson counsels in the book, “must have vision, creativity and, perhaps most importantly, the
ability to influence others to follow and support them in the challenges of moving an organization into uncharted and
often highly risky territory.”

Now, here comes this one that would have made you throw a few glances at Dimgba, perhaps, if you saw the book
with him: God Is Not A Christian. A collection, by John Allen, Archbishop Desmond Tutu’s biographer, of his
speeches, the one from where the title of book was chosen is from a speech he delivered in Britain, to leaders of
different faiths during a mission to the city of Birmingham in 1989.

“My first point seems overwhelmingly simple: that the accidents of birth and geography determine to a very large
extent to what faith we belong,” he argues. “The chances are very great that if you were born in Pakistan you are a
Muslim, or a Hindu if you happened to be born in India, or a Shintoist if it is Japan, and a Christian if you were born
in Italy. I don›t know what significant fact can be drawn from this - perhaps that we should not succumb too easily to
the temptation to exclusiveness and dogmatic claims to a monopoly of the truth of our particular faith. You could so
easily have been an adherent of the faith that you are now denigrating, but for the fact that you were born here
rather than there.

“My second point is this: not to insult the adherents of other faiths. We must acknowledge them for who they are in
all their integrity, with their conscientiously held beliefs; we must welcome them and respect them as who they are
and walk reverently on what is their holy ground, taking off our shoes, metaphorically and literally. We must hold to
our particular and peculiar beliefs tenaciously, not pretending that all religions are the same, for they are patently
not the same. We must be ready to learn from one another, not claiming that we alone possess all truth and that
somehow we have a corner on God.

“Surely it is good to know that God (in the Christian tradition) created us all (not just Christians) in his image, thus
investing us all with infinite worth, and that it was with all humankind that God entered into a covenant relationship,
depicted in the covenant with Noah when God promised he would not destroy his creation again with water. Surely
we can rejoice that the eternal word, the Logos of God, enlightens everyone - not just Christians, but everyone who
comes into the world; that what we call the Spirit of God is not a Christian preserve, for the Spirit of God existed
long before there were Christians, inspiring and nurturing women and men in the ways of holiness, bringing them to
fruition, bringing to fruition what was best in all. We do scant justice and honor to our God if we want, for instance,
to deny that Mahatma Gandhi was a truly great soul, a holy man who walked closely with God. Our God would be
too small if he was not also the God of Gandhi: if God is one, as we believe, then he is the only God of all his
people, whether they acknowledge him as such or not. God does not need us to protect him. Many of us perhaps
need to have our notion of God deepened and expanded. It is often said, half in jest, that God created man in his
own image and man has returned the compliment, saddling God with his own narrow prejudices and exclusivity,
foibles and temperamental quirks. God remains God, whether God has worshippers or not.

“This mission in Birmingham to which I have been invited is a Christian celebration, and we will make our claims for
Christ as unique and as the Savior of the world, hoping that we will live out our beliefs in such a way that they help
to commend our faith effectively. Our conduct far too often contradicts our profession, however. We are supposed
to proclaim the God of love, but we have been guilty as Christians of sowing hatred and suspicion; we commend
the one whom we call the Prince of Peace, and yet as Christians we have fought more wars than we care to
remember. We have claimed to be a fellowship of compassion and caring and sharing, but as Christians we often

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 5
                                              BOOKS OF Revelation

sanctify sociopolitical systems that belie this, where the rich grow ever richer and the poor grow ever poorer, where
we seem to sanctify a furious competitiveness, ruthless as can only be appropriate to the jungle.”

The post BOOKS OF Revelation appeared first on The Sun News.


Load-Date: September 23, 2014


  
