

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 3
                                          Dele Giwa's Assassination: 35 Years After (2)




                            Dele Giwa's Assassination: 35 Years After (2)
                                                    Daily Independent (Nigeria)
                                                    October 28, 2021 Thursday



Copyright 2021 Daily Independent. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 1601 words
Byline: UGOCHUKWU EJINKEONYE

Body


UGOCHUKWU EJINKEONYE

Giwa's death had plunged a broad spectrum of the Nigerian population into clearly unprecedented, monumental
grief and fear. People were afraid to open parcels sent to their homes and offices. The public outcry and loud
condemnation was deafening. Indeed, Giwa was right when he wrote in his highly regarded column, 'Parallax
Snaps,' some months earlier, that "One life taken in cold blood is as gruesome as millions lost in a pogrom." The
reactions that followed his death vindicated the truth of this assertion.

A lot of accusing fingers pointed at the government of the day. It was believed that only a special panel could
unravel the mystery that seemed to have attended the gory affair and unearth the unseen hands that perpetrated
the spine-chilling murder. In fact, 'Newswatch's Board of Directors called for a three-man Judicial Commission of
Enquiry headed by a retired judge of high repute, with an archbishop and an Imam as members, to probe the
murder. But the General Ibrahim Babangida regime insisted that it was the police that should investigate the
murder. And as would be expected, public skepticism about the likely outcome of investigations undertaken by the
Nigerian police was widespread.

In its editorial of October 28, 1986, 'The Guardian' newspaper disagreed with the Babangida regime's insistence
that the investigation into Dele Giwa's murder should be left for the police, despite widespread calls for a
Commission of Inquiry to be set up to probe it.

Said 'The Guardian': "The police have been signally inept in solving much simpler crimes, and the public is
justifiably unimpressed by their investigative ability and seriousness… The government has very little choice but to
appoint a special prosecutor… [which] will be a dramatic demonstration by government that it has nothing to hide,
and is as interested in discovering Giwa's assassins as the public is…"

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 3
                                   Dele Giwa's Assassination: 35 Years After (2)

A year after Giwa's murder, when the police predictably "found" nothing and "caught" no one, Ray Ekpu,
'Newswatch's new editor-in-chief, in a letter to the police reminded them that any murder which remained unsolved
could only mean "added insecurity to the living."

On his part, Lagos lawyer and human rights crusader, late Chief Gani Fawehinmi, SAN, vowed to catch Giwa's
killers. His attempt to dock Babangida's two security chiefs, Brig-Gen Halilu Akilu and Col A.K. Togun, brought him
in direct confrontation with the Babangida regime which made no pretense of its intention to not allow any probe
more penetrating than the unserious, shallow, perfunctory thing the police was doing. A day before Giwa's
assassination, Akilu had reportedly phoned Giwa's house to enquire about its correct address from Giwa's wife,
Funmi, explaining that Babangida's ADC was to stop by to deliver an item for Giwa at his house. And less than
twenty-four hours after this call, a letter bomb was delivered at Giwa's house!

Until his death in September 2009, Gani remained unrelenting in his determination to ensure that the people he had
continued to accuse of the murder since 1986 were brought to justice.

It is now thirty-five years since Giwa's murder shook Nigeria to her foundations. Several other mysterious
assassinations of journalists and other outspoken public figures have also followed. Maybe, if Giwa's murder was
solved and the perpetrators exposed and punished, it might have deterred other murderous characters from going
ahead to kill the other victims that were assassinated afterwards.

Even when Babangida and the two security chiefs who had served under him were summoned by the Oputa Panel
following Gani's petition, they had refused to show up. They instead sought a restraining order from the court to
frustrate any attempt by the Panel to compel them to appear before it. Their argument was that the Nigerian
president lacked the powers to set up the Panel. Although the Supreme Court later agreed with their submission in
a ruling that was delivered long after the Panel's report had been submitted, what has remained clear is that despite
the court judgment, unanswered questions about the gruesome murder have continued to linger in many minds,
which the Oputa Panel would have provided everyone fingered an amazing platform to convincingly address.

Interestingly, Col. A. K. Togun, in chat with airport correspondents in late 1986, gave some very instructive
illustrations that appeared to have thrown some light on the circumstances surrounding Dele Giwa's murder. Permit
me to reproduce the details of the encounter as reported in the 'Newswatch' edition of November 10, 1986:

"Ten days after he interrogated Giwa, Togun surfaced at the local terminal of Murtala Mohammed International
Airport Ikeja, on Monday, October 27, 1986. He told journalists at the airport that the press was 'shouting for a
crucifixion' without hearing the other side of the story. He said that at a seminar on security organised in Lagos,
October 9, for media executives and the security agencies, a compromise was struck that editors would inform the
SSS of any story they consider damaging to the government interests, and the security service would then decide
what to do about it.

"'I mean we came to a real agreement and one person cannot just come out and blackmail us. I am an expert in
blackmail', he said.

"He then illustrated his point by saying thus: 'If a motorcycle man suddenly dashed in front of a car and the driver
kills that motorcycle man, another motorcycle man who was there would not say that the motorcycle man that
dashed in front of the car was wrong. He would say the driver deliberately killed him, not knowing that he killed
himself'…

"Togun sternly warned the journalists that he would deal with them if their newspapers published the accounts of
their encounter with him and if he lost his job in the process. 'If you allow them to take away my uniform … I will
deal with you people and go to any length to even the score with you,' he warned, but added that 'Dele was my
friend'".

When asked what he thought about Col. Togun's revelations during his airport encounter with reporters, the then
Deputy Inspector General of police, Mr. Chris Omeban, who was in charge of the investigations into Giwa's murder
reportedly replied that the police does not go into proverbs.

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 3
                                    Dele Giwa's Assassination: 35 Years After (2)

And when police investigations into Giwa's death eventually yielded no results, Gani said: The police have failed to
find Giwa's killers because they know the killers!

After 35 years, the gory story of Giwa's gruesome murder has refused to go away. The greatest honour that can be
accorded to his name now is to insist that his killers be found. It is not yet late to set up a reputable Commission of
Inquiry as favoured by many Nigerians to reopen the case, reexamine the various narratives that have continued to
trail the murder and really get to the root of the tragedy, especially, now that most of the witnesses and even those
that have been consistently fingered are still alive.

While accusing fingers are still pointing to the direction the Babangida regime and its security chiefs whose names
have remained reoccurring items in the gory event, they, too, have been trying to present their own sides of the
story, and even attempting to return the accusation at the doorstep of the 'Newswatch' executives.

In a recent interview, Togun, who is now a retired general, tried to advance some theories to suggest that the
'Newswatch' London Bureau Chief, Mr. Soyinka, who was at the breakfast table with Giwa when the bomb
exploded (and who miraculously escaped being wounded, although he reportedly suffered severe hearing
impairment for quite some time) may have some more explanations to volunteer on the murder. All these
accusations and counter-accusations and all the other occurrences around the murder, including the contents of
Gani's petition, are what an Independent Commission of Inquiry can thoroughly examine and solve this murder that
shook the nation when it occurred.

Other cases of assassination which have also been shrouded in mystery need to be revisited too. Until Nigeria
demonstrates a capacity to solve murder cases, especially, high profile ones involving people critical of government
policies and actions, potential murderers would always derive incentive from the conviction that they can always
eliminate anyone in Nigeria and get away with it. And that "anyone" can be anybody! Somebody can be in
government today and surrounded by heavy security, but tomorrow, such a person might be out of office and
become as vulnerable as the next man out there. Leaders go all out to make society a safer place, not just because
of others, but also, for them and their relatives.

As murderers continue to be allowed to circulate within the bounds of civilised ambience, and eliminate people with
utmost impunity, they not only constitute a threat to hapless, decent and hard-working citizens, their vile activities
go further to stifle critical thoughts that are very essential in influencing the evolution of responsible governance
which fosters progress and development.

They may, however, continue to hide from man due to government's inability or unwillingness, or both, to fish them
out, and bring them to justice, but they, certainly, cannot hide from God. Their day with divine judgment will surely
come! And as the African-Caribbean writer, George Lamming, said in his classic novel, 'In The Castle Of My Skin',
"God can see the blackest ant on the blackest piece of coal on the blackest night."

Ejinkeonye, a writer and Journalist, is the author of the book, "Nigeria: Why Looting May Not Stop".


Load-Date: October 28, 2021


  
