

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2
           37 Years After, Analyst Blames Babangida, Successive Govts. For Failure To Find Giwa's Killers




37 Years After, Analyst Blames Babangida, Successive Govts. For Failure To
                            Find Giwa's Killers
                                                    Daily Independent (Nigeria)
                                                    October 19, 2023 Thursday



Copyright 2023 Daily Independent. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 283 words
Byline: Joy Anigbogu

Body


LAGOS - A Political Analyst, Deyemi Saka has blamed former military President, Ibrahim Babangida and
successive governments for failure to find the killers of renowned journalist, Dele Giwa, 37 years after his demise.

According to Saka, who spoke on TVC on Thursday, Dele Giwa didn't die from the letter bomb but died from an
explosion.

Saka, while making case for his position said that the late Giwa held the envelope with his left hand and tore it,
stressing that his right hand that tore the bomb was intact, and the explosion mangled the mahogany table in his
house.

He said, "I'm not happy that Chief Gani Fawehinmi is not alive, because he sought closure to Giwa's death before
he died.

"Victims or survivors of parcel bombs always have injuries on their faces or limbs. The death of Giwa wasn't
consistent with this.

"The eyewitness account by Kayode Soyinka explained how Giwa tore the envelope open. His face was spared.

"The only blame on Ibrahim Babangida was not fishing out his killers. I also blame successive governments for this.

On what he hopes to achieve with the new perspective as to who killed Giwa. Saka said, "He died from an
explosion, but not necessarily from a parcel bomb.

POLL

"Micheal Lassy, who was a victim of the parcel bomb, lost both hands. He now uses prosthetic hands. Giwa died of
explosion, but not letter bomb.

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 2
         37 Years After, Analyst Blames Babangida, Successive Govts. For Failure To Find Giwa's Killers

"The idea that Gen Akilu called Giwa's house to know his residence as an alibi to the fact that the Federal
Government killed him is far from the truth.

"If the State Security Service (SSS) as it was then known wanted anything on Giwa, they didn't have to call him to
ask for his address.

"Giwa didn't die from a parcel bomb, he died of an explosion," Saka added.


Load-Date: October 19, 2023


  
