

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 2
                               Laspotech Students' Initiative Towards Community Development




           Laspotech Students' Initiative Towards Community Development
                                                      Daily Independent (Lagos)
                                                   February 17, 2010 Wednesday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 838 words
Byline: Akinwunmi King
Dateline: Lagos

Body


Community development is said to be a structured intervention that gives communities greater control over the
conditions that affect their lives. However, it does not solve all the problems faced by a local community, but it goes
a long way in building confidence to tackle such problems as effectively. Community development also works at the
level of local groups and organisations rather than with individuals or families.

Community development has to look both ways: not only at how the community is working at the grass roots, but
also on how responsive key institutions see to the needs of local communities in which it operates.

The above explanations made the National Diploma (ND III Part Time) students of the Department of Mass
Communication, Lagos State Polytechnic, Ikorodu inaugurate a community development project recently. The
students donated two pieces of lectern to the department of mass communication and four to other departments in
the school. The purpose of the project according to the President of the organising committee, Moses Eluwa is to
give back to their immediate community, which is the school that has given a lot to them in the last three years.
"This inauguration of our community development project is part of the fulfillment of our final year for the certification
of National Diploma. I would like everyone to know why individuals and organisations should contribute to
community development in any area they find themselves.

"This helps a community especially the rural areas to grow faster than one can imagine, for organisations and
corporate bodies in different environment in Lagos State that it is their duty to contribute their own quota to the
development of any community," Eluwa stated.

Continuing, he said that it is not only the state and Federal Government that should be bear the burden of making
life better for the citizens, adding that people must support the government. "That is why we the ND III students of
mass communication department deemed it fit to contribute to the development of the school to help our lecturers
and the students themselves teach and learn in a conducive environment," he added.

The lesson to be learnt from the contribution according to Eluwa is that no matter how little one's contribution is
towards the development of one's community or society; it goes a long way to meet the needs of some people.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                          Laspotech Students' Initiative Towards Community Development

In order to know about the challenges ahead of them, the students invited two speakers from the legal and media
profession. The first speaker, Abiola Peters from the Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria (Choice F.M. 103.5)
Ikeja. He spoke on the topic "Career and Prospects for Mass Communication Graduates".

On career option in mass communication, Peters defined mass communication as the conveyance of a message
from a source, comprising an individual or group through a channel to a heterogeneous audience. On the
characteristics of a good journalist, which include honesty, decency, fairness, objectivity, nose for news,
courageous, integrity, confidence amongst other characteristics, he also told them how they can excel in the
profession of journalism.

On his part, Olafimihan Fatoba, a legal practitioner who spoke on topic "The Media and its Role in Nation Building",
stated that the media plays a major and fundamental role in bringing the society to the stage it is today. According
to him, the media has the major responsibility of upholding the responsibility and accountability of government to
the people, "the media is at the forefront of shaping the society towards its features goal. In the first, second and
third republic and into the brutal years of military dictatorship, the media was prominent, strong and never
retreating. The media have so remain even now that we have something in a resemblance of democracy

"It is therefore indisputable that the media in Nigeria against all odds have assisted in bringing the Nigeria society
into the present state. Let me quickly say that in doing this, the media have paid the ultimate price. One may need
to talk less about imprisonments, closure, proscription, intimidation and violence in the face of murder. Those who
are behind the murder of Dele Giwa may just be breathing some air of relief on the passing away of Chief Gani
Fawehinmi. Very fresh in our memory is the murder of Bayo Ohu, The Guardian Assistant News Editor, it is
therefore incontrovertible to say that the media has played a major and fundamental role in bringing the Nigerian
society to the position it is today", Fatoba stated.

The Public Relation Officer of the School, Lanre Kuye who represented the Rector at the event, lauded the ND III
students for the project. He urged other students to emulate the ND III mass communication students. He also
called on the Federal Government to listen to the striking lecturers of universities.

Highlight of the event was the unveiling of the six lecterns that was donated by the students, which was coordinated
by one of the lecturer in the Department, Ifedayo Daramola.


Load-Date: February 19, 2010


  
