

                                                                                   Page 1 of 3
   Smiling enigma may return to fore NIGERIAN POLITICS PRO-DEMOCRACY CAMPAIGNERS CONCERNED
                 OVER LEGAL MOVE AGAINST PRESIDENT OBASANJO BY FORMER MILI:




 Smiling enigma may return to fore NIGERIAN POLITICS PRO-DEMOCRACY
 CAMPAIGNERS CONCERNED OVER LEGAL MOVE AGAINST PRESIDENT
                     OBASANJO BY FORMER MILI:
                                             Financial Times (London,England)
                                                   July 2, 2002 Tuesday
                                                     London Edition 1



Copyright 2002 The Financial Times Limited

Section: INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY ; Pg. 10
Length: 894 words
Byline: By MICHAEL PEEL
Dateline: LAGOS

Body


Ibrahim B. Babangida, Nigeria's enigmatic former military ruler, may be about to take an uncharacteristic and
revealing step into the public gaze.

The general, who once charmed world leaders with his gap-toothed smile and talk of neo-liberal economics, has
begun a lawsuit against Olusegun Obasanjo, the president, in an attempt to forestall investigation of a murder
committed more than 15 years ago.

The action, due to come before the high court this month, could be one of the most high-profile and significant legal
cases to take place in Nigeria since independence in 1960.

  The hearing may reveal much about the country's ability to escape from the army domination that has shaped its
modern history and helped institutionalise a culture of public corruption.

Pro-democracy campaigners are concerned that Mr Obasanjo may be unwilling or unable to resist Mr Babangida,
who supported the president's election campaign in 1999 but has yet to declare his position on the presidential poll
due next year. "It was Babangida who helped Obasanjo to come to power," said Gani Fawehinmi, a lawyer and
human rights activist who turned down an offer to act for the president. "Obasanjo doesn't want to offend him."

The case centres on an unpublished report into human rights violations under military rule in Nigeria, which has had
just three elected civilian presidents since independence.

The document, known as the Oputa panel report, is the product of almost three years work and is similar in the
breadth of its scope to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission set up in South Africa after apartheid.

                                                                                   Page 2 of 3
   Smiling enigma may return to fore NIGERIAN POLITICS PRO-DEMOCRACY CAMPAIGNERS CONCERNED
                 OVER LEGAL MOVE AGAINST PRESIDENT OBASANJO BY FORMER MILI:

Mr Babangida is thought to be concerned that the panel has recommended further investigation into the death of
Dele Giwa, a journalist murdered in 1986 by a parcel bomb. The killing, the year after Mr Babangida took power in
a coup, happened shortly after Mr Giwa was questioned by the security services.

Halilu Akilu, Mr Babangida's director of military intelligence, is a co-plaintiff in the lawsuit, whose defendants include
members of both the government and the Oputa panel. Documents seen by the Financial Times suggest that Mr
Babangida plans to argue that the president would be exceeding his powers if he implemented the panel's
recommendations.

An affidavit deposed by Mr Babangida's lawyers says the Court of Appeal in Lagos has ruled that the president
acted unconstitutionally in appointing the Oputa panel in the first place. "It will be in the interest of justice to restrain
(the defendants)," it says.

Mr Babangida has made extensive efforts to protect himself since he was forced out of office in 1993 after eight
years in power. His tenure ended amid outrage after he reneged on a promise to return the country to civilian rule
and cancelled the results of presidential elections won by the late Moshood Abiola.

The annulment destroyed the remainder of an international credibility he had nurtured through relationships with
politicians such as Lady Thatcher, the former British Conservative prime minister, who sent him a goodwill message
shortly after he took power. Lady Thatcher received Mr Babangida for lunch at Downing Street during a 1989 state
visit and praised the president for putting in place "courageous" economic reforms that resembled her own.

His reputation has suffered further over unanswered questions relating to the corruption that flourished during his
presidency.

Nigeria has earned more than Dollars 250bn in revenues from oil over the last 40 years but much of it has been
used to service official venality rather than for social development.

The United Nations Development Programme millennium human development report ranks the country as one of
the world's poorest and says average incomes have declined by an average of 1.5 per cent a year over the last
quarter century.

Nigerian politics still feels Mr Babangida's influence, despite his departure from office, and newspapers constantly
speculate that he might try to return to power. The general is reputed to be a skilled manipulator and is referred to
as the "Maradona of Nigerian politics" - he ruled in the 1980s when Argentina's football team was in its heyday -
and the "evil genius".

Mr Obasanjo, a Christian southerner, could face electoral difficulties if he fails to secure the support of Mr
Babangida, a Muslim from the populous and politically powerful north. Nigeria has suffered since independence
from regional conflicts.

As a former military ruler, Mr Obasanjo is under pressure to show he is serious about bringing perpetrators of army
violence to justice.

The president is criticised for endorsing brutal behaviour by the military, most notably when the army massacred
more than 200 civilians in the state of Benue last year. The position of Mr Obasanjo and his fellow defendants, as
laid out in an affidavit seen by the FT, is that they will oppose a court action they consider "speculative, academic,
frivolous and vexatious".

The resolution of this argument between the current and former rulers may provide important clues as to the
political future of Nigeria as well as the fate of Mr Babangida, who was the subject earlier this year of supportive
newspaper advertisements placed by the "IBB 2003 movement".

The pictures showed the general wearing his familiar grin and was accompanied by the message: "Nigerians, get
ready to smile."

                                                                                  Page 3 of 3
  Smiling enigma may return to fore NIGERIAN POLITICS PRO-DEMOCRACY CAMPAIGNERS CONCERNED
                OVER LEGAL MOVE AGAINST PRESIDENT OBASANJO BY FORMER MILI:


Load-Date: July 1, 2002


  
