

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 2
                    RIGHTS- NIGERIA : PROBING 15 YEARS OF ABUSES UNDER THE MILITARY




 RIGHTS-NIGERIA: PROBING 15 YEARS OF ABUSES UNDER THE MILITARY
                                                       IPS-Inter Press Service
                                                   August 25, 1999, Wednesday



Copyright 1999 IPS-Inter Press Service/Global Information Network

Length: 589 words
Byline: By Remi Oyo
Dateline: LAGOS, Aug. 25

Body


The shadows of late Nigerian rights activist Ken Saro-Wiwa and journalist Dele Giwa continue to
haunt policymakers in Nigeria.

Saro-Wiwa, leader of the Movement for the Survival of Ogoni People (MOSOP), was executed along with eight
other Ogoni leaders in November 1995, allegedly on the orders of the late military dictator, Gen. Sani Abacha.

His compatriot, Giwa, was killed by a letter bomb in October 1986 during Gen. Ibrahim Babangida's rule.

The two murders are now, along with hundreds of others, the subject of investigations by the new Nigerian civilian
government of Pres. Olusegun Obasanjo, who was sworn-in in May following 15 years of military rule.

The investigation is being conducted by a panel headed by retired Supreme Court Judge Chukwudifu Oputa, who
was appointed by the Obasanjo government.

Controversial Nigerian lawyer Gani Fawehinmi, who is representing Giwa, is demanding two billion naira ($ 20
million) as compensation for the death of his client, who was editor-in-chief of the "Newswatch" magazine before his
death.

Fawehinmi is also demanding the prosecution of Col. Halilu Akilu and Lt. Col. Kunle Togun, both retired officers of
the army's intelligence corps at the time of Giwa's murder.

In the petition, Fawehinmi described himself as "friend and counsel to Mr. Dele Giwa (who) commenced and
concluded a private investigation into the circumstances surrounding the cold-blooded murder of the courageous
journalist.

"Giwa was lawful Nigerian citizen, entitled to his right of life and the pursuit of happiness and investigative
journalism," he said.

"The deceased," Fawehinmi said, "was presented with a parcel bomb dressed in official configuration but which
connected the military regime of Gen. Ibrahim Babangida. The parcel bomb terminated the life of the deceased
without any justification or excuse."

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
                 RIGHTS- NIGERIA : PROBING 15 YEARS OF ABUSES UNDER THE MILITARY

Babangida, who ruled Nigeria between 1985 and 1993, has also been named in another petition. Dele Akande, a
top Nigerian lawyer, alleges that the former President committed "criminal annulment" when he canceled the results
of the 1993 presidential election, which the late businessman Moshood Abiola was presumed to have won.

Abiola died in detention in July 1998.

"The annulment of the June 12 (election) participated in by 14 million voters in the country, denied this country the
opportunity to have the person they elected freely and justly to occupy the post of the president of the country,"
Akande was quoted as saying in a local publication in the commercial capital of Lagos this week.

Akande is also demanding that the panel summon Humphrey Nwosu, who headed the National Electoral
Commission under Babangida, to tell his side of the story.

Nwosu has never granted an interview since the annulment of the polls, which resulted in the death of hundreds of
protesters, the jailing of scores of others and the ultimate emergence of Abacha, the nation's worst dictator since
Nigeria became an independent nation in 1914.

The National Democratic Coalition (NADECO), one of the most vilified pro-democracy groups during Abacha's five-
year rule, has also petitioned the panel, chronicling the "degradations" suffered by its members under the Abacha
regime.

The nine-page memorandum argues that "despite NADECO's peaceful methods of resistance, the Abacha junta
launched a full-scale war against its members. Where we called for dialogue, Abacha hounded us to jail, sent
assassins after us, and bombers to our homes."

NADECO is demanding two billion naira (about $ 20 million) from the government as compensation.


Load-Date: August 26, 1999


  
