

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 2
                                                      How to Go to Aba [column]




                                             How to Go to Aba [column]
                                                      Daily Independent (Lagos)
                                                         July 18, 2010 Sunday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 966 words
Byline: Michael John

Body


There is this fancy saying in democracies, which is absolutely true and has been true since the invention of the gun,
that "the pen is mightier than the sword." Of course, no one uses the sword anymore for warfare or for security, and
it has been banished to the museum and ceremonial occasions. The pen is still very much in use and I bet you I
have already used one today or will use it in the course of the day. So the pen is absolutely mightier than the extinct
equipment known as the sword, just as the fowl is mightier than the dinosaurs (because they - dinosaurs - do not
exist anymore).

Stretch that saying a little more and claim that the "pen is mightier than the gun" and I challenge you to take a trip to
Aba, Abia State, Nigeria, armed with a carton of pens and newspapers and see what will happen to you and your
miserly pens and newspapers. That is where you will discover that the gun is mightier than the pen - particularly
when it is loaded and pointed at you by someone whose finger is on the trigger and the safety catch has been
released. Someone who is high on drugs and with slurred speech.

Perhaps, Wahab Oba, chairman of the Lagos State Council of the Nigeria Union of Journalists (NUJ); Adolphus
Okonkwo, a zonal secretary; Sylvester Okere, secretary of the Lagos State council; and Sola Oyeyipo, a Lagos-
based journalist, had such fancy ideas that the pen is mightier than the sword, now they are sadder but wiser.
They attended the National Executive Council meeting of the NUJ in Uyo and after he addressed the meeting, the
Akwa Ibom State Governor, Chief Godswill Obot Akpabio, offered all of them air tickets back home. Mr Aniekan
Umanah, Information Commissioner, claimed he gave them a travel ban, and warned them to fly and not to pass
through areas which they could run into kidnappers. In case you miss the point, Aba is now like a cross between
Afghanistan and Iraq. The kidnap rate of persons in expensive cars is like one every half an hour - which ranks it
with Iraq shortly after the American invasion.

But like you know, journalists are trained to be curious and to tread where angels fear. Many have died in wars (of
course you remember the dear colleagues who died in Liberia and the ones killed in Nigeria by gunmen and
rioters), and passing through Aba was to them part of the professional hazard. Armed with their pens they set out
on the journey to Lagos intending to pass through Aba. At Aba the kidnappers who had since seized the local
government from Governor Theodore Orji of Abia State struck and abducted them.

I do not blame the journalists because if they had been witness to a little innocuous debate the week before their
trip in our newsroom, they would have known better. Someone from Abia State, by the name of Emeka, was
involved in an argument with Hassan, an indigene of Kaduna. Emeka complained about the fuel situation and was

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                                             How to Go to Aba [column]

angry that an oil refinery was sited in Kaduna even though Kaduna does not have an iota of crude oil. Hassan
laughed and said "What about your state? You even have a police commissioner in Abia State even though you
have no iota of security, particularly in Aba!!!" Emeka had no answer to that. I believe that if it were in the days of
Gani Fawehinmi (bless his soul), he would have sued the Federal Government for not issuing a travel ban to
Nigerians not to go to Aba or pass through the town.

Indigenes of the crime-plagued town are claiming that if it were in the days of the Bakassi Boys the situation would
have been controlled. But some opinions have it that it is the Bakassi Boys who are fighting back and creating the
madness. Whatever the case, journalists are not money bags and kidnapping journalists and asking for N30 million
ransom is a huge joke in news rooms. The combined assets of all the journalists (including their pensions and
gratuities) may not reach that amount.

But the kidnappers have proved once again that a loaded gun is mightier than the pen. The military dictatorships
proved it with the killing of Dele Giwa, Bagauda Kaltho and a host of others. Now some bandits have decided to
also prove that a gun whether in the hands of the Directorate of Military Intelligence, the Strike Force or a kidnapper
is still mightier than the pen.

Jumping like a cat on hot bricks, the Federal Government has scampered from one statement to another to
dissociate itself from and condemn the incident of kidnapping. I sympathise with them and urge them to simply
legalise kidnapping and tax it out of business. Kidnappers should pay tax on their loot and declare their assets.
After all, when policemen stand at check points and extort money from you, is that not some kind of gratuitous
"kidnapping?" And come to think of it, these policemen are very smart! They would pick a spot and stand there from
January till December so that if you are a kidnapper, you would know the road to take and evade them. This is
policing by positional advertisement - you advertise your positions for safety reasons.

In countries abroad, policemen rove around in squad cars, and if they mount check points they move it around at
short notices so that you cannot predict on which route they may be. Not the brave Nigeria Police (who would rather
advertise on radio or television, the routes they intend to be on, if they had the money and budget for it) than set
itself on a course of collision with the men of the underworld.

I deeply sympathise with these journalists and I hereby issue a travel ban to all my readers not to pass through Aba.
But if you are from there, you can still go - but please park your car at the boundary of Aba, hire an old rusty
motorcycle or Volkswagen Beetle car (70's model) and ride home. Kidnappers do not abduct men on rusty old
motorcycles or Beetle cars, according to research.


Load-Date: July 19, 2010


  
