

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2
   37 years after Giwa's death: Etsako council chairman set up secondary school essay competition in his honour




     37 years after Giwa's death: Etsako council chairman set up secondary
                     school essay competition in his honour
                                                          The Sun (Nigeria)
                                                      October 20, 2023 Friday



Copyright 2023 The Sun Publishing Limited Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 368 words
Byline: Cyril

Body


From Ighomuaye Lucky, Benin

As a way of immortalizing his name after 37 years of his death, Etsako Central LGA chairman Hon. Solomon
Obomighie has established Dele Giwa's essay competition among secondary schools in the Local Government in
commemoration of his journalism profession.

Late Dele Giwa, was a prominent journalist and an illustrious son of Etsako Central, a renowned editor-in-chief
and chief executive of Newswatch magazine, made significant contributions to the journalism profession and
remains a symbol of integrity and courage in the face of adversity who was killed on October 19th,1986, through a
pancel bomb.

The chairman said late Dele Giwa secondary school essay competition is aimed to celebrate and promote the
values that he embodied throughout his career and it will provide a platform for young writers and journalists in the
local government to know more about him and express their thoughts on pressing societal issues and showcase
their writing skills.

"This competition will not only serve as a tribute to late Dele Giwa but also foster a nurturing environment for
budding writers and journalists to receive recognition and encouragement. It is our hope that through this platform,
we will inspire the next generation of journalists to embrace the core principles of truth, transparency, and
accountability", he added.

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 2
  37 years after Giwa's death: Etsako council chairman set up secondary school essay competition in his honour

Hon Obomighie further stated that the late Dele Giwa secondary school essay competition is an initiative that
demonstrates his commitment to appreciate the worthy sons of the entire Etsako Central Local Government and a
way to promoting education, fostering talent, and upholding the legacy of our remarkable individuals.

"We will be collaborating with local education authority, private school owners and professional journalists to make
this competition a success and impactful among the young ones.

The chairman said that the council would give a details regarding the essay competition, including eligibility, prizes,
and submission guidelines, will be released soon.

Hon. Obomighie however urged all secondary school principals to give a wider awareness to their students in the
Local Government for participation as it will help in widening their writing skills.


Load-Date: October 20, 2023


  
