

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 3
                                                  Untold Stories of Nigerian Media




                                        Untold Stories of Nigerian Media
                                                              This Day (Lagos)
                                                             December 12, 2015



Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1388 words
Byline: Yinka Olatunbosun

Body


Writing a review on two of a four-volume series of incisive interviews with top Nigerian media leaders is a rare
privilege. One reason is that the books in review, Nigerian Media Leaders: Voices Beyond the Newsroom Volume
One and Two was edited by Richard Ikiebe, a former Daily Times reporter whose career path led him up to the
Presidency.

Another reason is that the calibre of personalities featured in both series are historic firebrands; with intimidating
record of excellence in a profession that is consistently rated among the world's most dangerous. If there is a third
reason, then it will be the fact that the issues raised in the documented conversations point in all directions including
the writer, the reader and the content.

In November, when Ikiebe presented these books to a gathering of journalists during a meeting of the members of
the Lagos Chapter of the Nigerian Union of Journalists (NUJ) at the Ladi Lawal Press Centre, Alausa, Ikeja, he
seemed to be very concerned about getting the books into the right hands. From personal perusal, the books can
be described as essential read for all media professionals, would-be professionals and those who may have been
disenchanted with the decline in the practice of courageous journalism.

No doubt, many bookshops are awash with books that their writers claim to be citable authorities but since Fred
Omu's classic historical piece, Press and Politics in Nigeria (1859-1937), there seem to be a dearth of rigorous
scholarship in the contemporary understanding of Nigerian media. Some of the existing works before these books
are poorly edited, lacking details, dumping crucial issues and sadly too, they are persuasively, if not mandatorily,
sold to students of mass communication.

As Patrick Dele Cole rightly observed in his foreword to the volumes, Ikiebe "offers an invaluable service to
Nigerian journalism and history" through these literary pieces. For Ikiebe, it was a project he championed as a
senior Fellow and Director of the Centre for Leadership in Journalism, School of Media and Communication, Pan-
Atlantic University, Lagos to crystallise the experiences of post-independence journalists just as Professor Omu did
in his time.

His students, who worked with him on this project are Obianuju Asika, Segun Balogun, Ayodele Oloyede, Kanto
Ekenta, Timothy Konyehi, Jacqueline Bossua, Joachim MacEbong, Omawumi Ogbeh, Chidi Ifeanyi, Abimbola
Murtala and Segun Oluwatosin. Both volumes were dedicated to the memories of three exceptional journalists
namely, Dele Giwa, Stanley Macebuh and Alfred Opubor.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                                          Untold Stories of Nigerian Media

As daunting as the thought of reading two 388-paged books in a short time may sound, the editor had ensured that
in their final state, the volumes are arranged in readable and high-quality prints while situating the reader in the
room with each interviewee. Rather than edit each interview into efficient pieces with perfect finishing lines, the
works retain actual responses from the narrators such as Pa Laban Namme, Dr. Christopher Kolade, Pa Sam
Amuka, Mallam Adamu Ciroma, Dr. Patrick Dele-Cole, Prince Tony Momoh, Aremo Segun Osoba, Engr. Vincent
Maduka, Dr. Doyin Abiola, Mal Mohammed Haruna, Betty Irabor, Nduka Obaigbena, Ray, Ekpu, Dan Agbese,
Frank Aigbogun, Prince Henry Odukomaiya, Femi Adesina and several others.

The stories were told from the angles of publishers, veteran broadcasters, content producers in electronic media,
public servants and policy-makers in media practice. Through the questions and answers, the past, present and
future of Nigerian media are submitted under the intellectual microscope. In addition, the volumes provide a
rationale for rethinking the role of media in nation-building especially in democratic Nigeria. Tapping from wealth of
experience of these key players, much could be read between the lines about the controversies surrounding the
romance of Nigerian media and the government.

In a broad overview, all the journalists agreed to a lot of facts about the profession. One point of convergence is the
plummeting professionalism. Another is the impact of corruption and education on the true practice of journalism.
They all recommended continuous training for journalists and the need to study the operating terrain before running
the business of media ownership.

They disagreed on the debate on when journalism is at its best in Nigeria that is, during military or democracy rule.
While some of the interviewees held that courageous journalism existed before democratic rule in Nigeria, others
remarked that the media flourished better in the atmosphere of freedom which democracy births. However, they
warned that freedom comes with responsibility and charged young journalists to combine professionalism with
virtues such as humility, hard work, resilience and willingness to learn.

There are a few instances where the interviewees evaded probing questions, even attempting to convert the
interviewer to the interviewee. For instance, Ikiebe wanted to know the circumstances that led to the murder of Dele
Giwa from his friend and associate, Ray Ekpu. Ekpu recounted the final moments of the first journalist to be killed
by letter-bomb and his friction with the Babangida-led administration. However, from his revelation, the former Head
of State had a good working relationship with the slain journalist till the unfortunate incident. Ekpu's piece was
emotional as he recalled that dark period of living in perpetual fear while professing to love being a journalist.

For Betty Irabor, Doyin Abiola, Bilikisu Yusuf, Agbeke Ogunsanwo and Victoria Ezeokoli, it was a time to feel the
pulse of women who have excelled in a male-dominated field against the forces of statutory, proprietorial and self-
censorship.

In all, the volumes are potential references in media discourse in Nigeria as they give insightful direction to a path-
finding reader. Two stage comedies, Ahmed Yerima's The Lottery Ticket and Jerry Alagbaoso's Specks in Our Eyes
will be staged at the Abuja Sheraton Hotel today.

The stage plays, produced by Mosaic Theatre Production and Cruise Entertainment, will start by 4 pm and will both
be repeated as from 7pm at the Ladi Kwali Convention Centre of the Sheraton Abuja Hotel. They will be performed
by some of Nigeria's best theatre artistes, such as Patrick Diabuah, Omololu Sodiya, Odera Orji, Kelvin-Mary
Peters and a host of others.

The plays are directed by Agozie Ugwu and produced by Ekene Ngwu, the duo who featured Ramsey Nouah in Ola
Rotimi's Our Husband Has Gone Mad Again in Abuja, last August.

The production also has the multitalented British Council-trained and certified lighting and set designer, Richie
Umezinwa as the technical director.

The Lottery Ticket, with hilarious scenes and twists, discusses the greed and gullibility of man, while Specks in Our
Eyes, a satirical comedy, explores the ills of the society with an aim to correct them by encouraging self-reflection.

                                                                                                            Page 3 of 3
                                            Untold Stories of Nigerian Media

In its bid to explore the efficacy of theatre as a veritable tool for the stimulation of attitudinal change in our society,
the Mosaic Theatre Production and Cruise Entertainment has remained committed in enshrining theatre in the
corporate culture of Abuja. They are enticing the Federal Capital Territory audience to see two stage comedies in
one sitting at Sheraton Abuja Hotel, which has become the venue for most stage performances in Abuja.

The producer, Ekene Ngwu, said: "Our efforts to popularise theatre and its benefits to society in Abuja have been
well received as our event in August was well attended and also supported by organisations like Sheraton,
Silverbird, AfricaMagic TV, Ebony Life TV, Hot FM, Drumstix and a host of others. Many other theatre producers
have been emboldened by our resolve and efforts, and that is a good sign that Abuja people would come to love
theatre and its live performances more than screen dramas."

Ace director, Agozie Ugwu, who is a lecturer and a PhD student of theatre and film studies, said: "Theatre is like a
glutton; it feeds from and serves every discipline in human society, arts and sciences inclusive, and that's why we
believe that if we keep doing what we do, our positive impact on the social, psychological, behavioural, scientific
and environmental issues and aspects of our society, and the world at large, will definitely be felt."


Load-Date: December 13, 2015


  
