

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 2
             Dele Giwa's Mother Dies At 87 - As Community Demands Fresh Probe Into Dele Giwa's Death




  Dele Giwa's Mother Dies At 87 - As Community Demands Fresh Probe Into
                             Dele Giwa's Death
                                                             Vanguard (Lagos)
                                                             January 08, 2013



Copyright 2013 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 563 words
Byline: Simon Ebegbulem
Dateline: Benin City

Body


THE mother of Nigeria's foremost journalist and late Editor in-Chief of Newswatch Magazine, Dele Giwa, Madam
Elekia Aishat Giwa, 87, is dead.

Madam Giwa died at the Aruna Ogun Hospital in Ikorodu, Lagos, Tuesday morning, of an undisclosed ailment.

Already the people of Ugbekpe, Ekperi in Etsako Central Local Government Area of Edo State, have been thrown in
mourning following the death of Madam Giwa.

Before her death at about 5 a.m, she was living with her daughter, Abibat Ronke Aboaba.

Her son, Dele, a celebrated journalist was murdered by unknown persons via a letter bomb delivered to his house
in Ikeja on October 19, 1986. The parcel was marked "From the C-in-C" which raised speculations that the then
military government had something to do with his death.

The government then, under Gen. Ibrahim Babangida, however, denied any complicity in the murder and institute a
panel to find the killers which was never achieved.

The people of Ugbkpe Ekperi lamented, yesterday, that Madam Giwa died before the Federal Government could
unmasked the killers of Dele Giwa and called on President Goodluck Jonathan to commence fresh investigation
into Giwa's murder.

Former Chairman of Etsako Central Local Government Council and one of the leaders of Ekperi community,
Paschal Ugbome, described the death of Madam Giwa as another devastating news for the people, particularly as
the Federal Government failed to fish out the killers of her son whom he described as a fearless journalist and a
proud son of Ekperi land.

Meanwhile, Chairman, Nigeria Union of Journalists, NUJ, Lagos State Council, Mr Deji Elumoye, has described the
death of late Dele Giwa's mother as painful.

                                                                                              Page 2 of 2
          Dele Giwa's Mother Dies At 87 - As Community Demands Fresh Probe Into Dele Giwa's Death

In a condolence message to the family over the death of Madam Elekia Giwa, yesterday, Elumoye said the news
came as a shock, but "we thank God for the life of mama."

He said: "Mama living till this year showed her strong spirit considering the manner her son, Dele Giwa, was killed."

Also, the Edo State Government, yesterday, described the death of Madam Giwa as shocking and a great loss to
the people of the state and regretted that the Federal Government was yet to find the killers of her son, Dele Giwa.

Secretary to the State Government, Prof. Julius Ihonbvere, who reacted to the death, described the deceased as
"strong mother" who kept the home front solid despite the "high level conspiracy against the family."

"The governor and the people of Edo State received news of the death with shock and sadness, the passing away
of the daughter of our great land whose son and left indelible landmark in the practice of journalism and activism in
this country. It is our regret that the custodians of power in this Nigeria state were never able to apprehend the
killers of our dear son Dele Giwa.

"As the souls of the mother and son lives in the bosom of the Lord, may they continue to hunt those killers."

Reacting also, former Deputy Governor of Edo State, Rev. Peter Obadan, lamented that "Dele was not alive to
mourn his mother."

Obadan said,"It is a shame there is nobody to mourn her. It is also unfortunate that the country is yet to establish
those who killed Dele Giwa. Our hearths go to the family because it will bring back the memory of this great son of
our land; he was a fearless, not just writer but a progressive developer of young minds and we still miss him. May
her gentle soul rest in peace."


Load-Date: January 9, 2013


  
