

                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 2
                                               Dimgba Igwe: Passage of the veteran




                                    Dimgba Igwe: Passage of the veteran
                                                           The Sun (Nigeria)
                                                   October 15, 2014 Wednesday




Copyright 2014 The Sun Publishing Limited Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. (Syndigate.info) All Rights Reserved




Length: 684 words
Byline: Kola Johnson

Body


I had known Dimgba Igwe by reputation, right from his years, as a staff writer in the defunct Sunday Concord.
However, my first chance of an inter-personal interaction with him, was about twenty eight years ago.
The post Dimgba Igwe: Passage of the veteran appeared first on The Sun News.

I had known Dimgba Igwe by reputation, right from his years, as a staff writer in the defunct Sunday Concord.
However, my first chance of an inter-personal interaction with him, was about twenty eight years ago.

The veteran journalist, Monzor Olowosago and Dimgba were colleagues in the Sunday Concord, then edited by
Dele Giwa, the flambouyant media chief of blessed memory.

I was at that time Assistant Editor, Oriwu Sun, a leading community newspapers in the Nigerian journalistic
firmament, founded by Monzor Dawodu Olowosago; who prior to his advent into newspaper publishing was the
production Editor of Sunday Concord.

At that momentous inception of that pioneer leader of community journalism, colleagues of the publisher, who were
obviously joyous about his vision, had ensured that they availed their quota of input in the drive to propel the
experiment to the envisioned height of fulfillment.

Prominent in this category were Dimgba Igwe and Chuma Adichie, also of Sunday Concord. Dimgba and Adichie
were regular visitors in our office, then. This aside, I had cause to relate on a frequent basis with Dimgba - usually
on the premise of his regular editorial contribution to our newspaper - at the Mafoluku location of his office at the
then defunct Concord newspapers With time, Dimgba receeded in presence, ostensibly on account of his
increasingly busy schedule, as Adichie featured more prominently, even to date.

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
                                       Dimgba Igwe: Passage of the veteran

While Adichie radiated impressively personable airs, Dimgba,in my own view, was more of a taciturn person. This
might afterall be a natural outward façade; at variance with, perhaps, a more sublime inner nature.

My interpretation of this, whether rightly or wrongly, was that it might be due to his Pentecostal strain of born-
againism. It was, of course, for this code of born-again as one was apt to recall then, that the Oriwu Sun publisher,
Mr Olowosago, would usually tease him.

As Dimgba rose through the ranks from the National Concord to the Weekend Concord, and later, The Sun –
coupled with his extra-journalistic exploits in book authorship – it would not be off the mark to suppose that it was
the hand of God tellingly visible as a trademark consequent upon of the prophetic covenant of Divine prosperity of
God, for the exclusively hallowed circle of his chosen.

Dimgba, to be sure, soon attained the apotheosis of journalistic fame and glory. He was a good family man.

For a self-made man like this writer, who for whatever reason did not have the benefit of a first degree; this was no
mean achievement – but an unusual kind, exclusively repository of the inner circuit of the beloved of the most high
divine.

For Dimgba, all things went well. Life was fine. Life for him, was the quintessential paradise on earth. Dimgba
became a role model to many, – especially those driven by hard work, excellence and service to God. He did well in
these areas.It was against this background that when recently, the departed media notable was writing, in a tribute
– in the wake of the death of Dora Akunyili – little did the imminence of his own passage occur to anyone. It was as
if the dividing line of separation, in the spatial frame of time, would amount to an eternity.

Can you imagine a man, who in a remarkably pathetic elegy as rendered in his regular weekly column in The Sun
had narrated his sense of shock, in the face of the eventual, but grim unfolding that he would have no option than to
henceforth refer to Akunyili in the past tense.

However, not exactly three months after, the mourner himself is gone in a stupefyingly reminiscent motion picture
fiction or fantasy-like fable of classic textbook yarn for the marines. Gone to be seen no more. What an intriguing
irony.

•Johnson writes from Lagos.

The post Dimgba Igwe: Passage of the veteran appeared first on The Sun News.


Load-Date: October 15, 2014


  
