

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 2
                                              Five Books for Media Persons [opinion]




                                  Five Books for Media Persons [opinion]
                                                             Daily Trust (Abuja)
                                                               June 14, 2015



Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1063 words
Byline: Eugenia Abu

Body


Many persons have asked me how I have managed to achieve the little I have in the media profession. I believe,
first of all, it's the grace of God and secondly, passion and learning from my seniors in the profession, practice,
reading, research, strategic thinking and finally learning from journalists in other climes. I have always loved
television, watching Hawaii Five O, The Saint, Charlie's Angels, Canon from when I was very young.

I watched Khalifa Baba Ahmed of blessed memory, the late Uncle Bode Alalade, the late Ikenna Ndaguba, Bimbo
Oloyede, Dr. Tom Adaba and the likes over the years. But I had no clue that I was going to work in television. I
wanted to be a Lawyer. But God said this was my calling. I have been blessed to be a multimedia personality with
experience in Radio, TV and the Print. It is truly a blessing. I read voraciously and listened keenly from Letters to
America on BBC Radio to reading Mohammed Haruna to Dan Agbese to Dele Giwa and several other columnists
and from a very young age, I read Reader's Digest, Time Magazine, Vogue etcetera. My father ensured he
prepared me well so I had these magazines whenever I needed them. I was a bookie. I read everything. Today I
wish to present to my readers the type of books that inspire me as a broadcast journalist, columnist and a
professional. It is hoped that these books will give out something to aspiring media persons and validate those
already in practice.

1. Barbara Walters has been an incredible international broadcasting icon. At 85 years old, she has paid her dues
interviewed world leaders from Castro to Bush and also interviewed major world celebrities. When I saw her book,
Audition, at an international airport, I had to have it. Audition is a fat memoir of her career, her life and her journey.
In a New York Times Sunday book review, David Kelly reports, " In 1980, Barbara Walters was about to report that
Ronald Reagan had selected George H. W. Bush as his running mate when another reporter at another network
beat her to it. Walters says she "nearly went crazy" after losing "the scoop of the whole convention". Her colleague
George Will simply looked at her "with disdain" and declared, "It's ONLY TELEVISION, Barbara". Heresy. "Audition"
tells of a life lived on, in and never far from TV. This bulky memoir weighs in at more than 600 pages, falling
midway, bulk wise, between"Oblomov" and "Ulysses". Unlike Marion (Molly) Bloom and Ilya Ilyich Oblomov,
however, Barbara Jill Walters has never been content to lie around in bed all day. She's a woman of action who
doesn't let anyone push her around... " All journalists in broadcast and print must get a copy of this book by a world-
renowned broadcast journalist who has seen it all.

2. Ndaeyo Uko remains one of Nigeria's phenomenal journalists; cheeky, satirical and knowledgeable. He joined
The Guardian Newspapers as a young French graduate and went on to become the enfant terrible of the print

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 2
                                       Five Books for Media Persons [opinion]

media holding down some of the most exciting coverages for many years and writing an audacious column in The
Daily Times titled Rock 'n Rule, which later became a book. In this book he took a satirical look at Information
Minister Alex Akinyele's moustache (which led to an uproar) and met President Babangida because of what he had
written about him in his column. He has worked in newsrooms in the United States, United Kingdom and Nigeria as
reporter, Columnist and Newspaper Editor. Now he is on the faculty of Monash University Australia teaching
journalism. Friend, brother, adventurer, Dr. Uko's book Story Building, which he was kind to give me on a visit to
Australia, demystifies the narrative style of writing by playfully undoing the knots of journalistic storytelling. And by
Jove, he is more than qualified to write this book. Get a copy.

3. A.A Gill is a columnist and travel writer and I ran into his book Here and There through a recommendation in the
British Airways onboard magazine. Just excerpts set me wanting more and I tracked down the book and got my
copy. If you want to do travel writing, as I so badly want to, this is one of the books for you. Exciting, acerbic and
highly entertaining, Gill leaves you in no doubt that he knows his onions. This is an engaging collection of Gill's
travel tales around the world. Brilliant beyond compare, he is humorous and charming and also a touch
controversial but I could not put the book down. Writing a weekly column for The Guardian of London and The
Sunday Times with contributions to Vanity Fair and The New York Times. I just want to be A. A. Gill!

4. Oprah A Biography is the story of Oprah Winfrey, media mogul, entrepreneur and broadcaster. This is not the
first time this book is appearing in this column but it deserves to be among the five that every journalist should
read. I have read it twice. This is the story of her media beginnings and how she became one of the world's richest
media personalities with businesses spanning studios, a magazine in her name and interests in movies and books.
The story, as told by the famous biographer Kitty Kelley, is unauthorized as all Kitty Kelley books go, which makes it
all the more delicious.

5. Orji Ogbonnaya Orji whose name has been synonymous with Radio coverages of particularly the State House
has had extensive experience in broadcasting journalism, communication and public service spanning over two
decades. His first book, Inside Aso Rock is interesting but my focus in this week's column is his second book, What
They Don't Teach You in Broadcasting. This is a book that stands as the link between classroom teaching and field
experience. This is a book I have been meaning to write in the last 10 years but trust me, one of these days; I will
respond to all my fans and write a book that's akin. I am not letting the cat out of the bag just yet. Keep your eyes
on this page. Get Ogbonnaya's book if you aspire to be a broadcaster/journalist. Learn from his many years of
experience if you are already practicing.

These bonus books will set you thinking more like a journalist. They are all robust, thought provoking and amazing.
Get them all.

a) Talk Like Ted by Carmine Gallo.

b) Africa Altered States, Ordinary Miracles by Richard Dowden.

c) Burn This Book by Toni Morrison.

d) We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed with Our Families. Stories from Rwanda by Phillip
Gourevitch.


Load-Date: June 15, 2015


  
