

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 5
                            Ninth Daily Trust Dialogue - Politics and the Media in Africa [column]




       Ninth Daily Trust Dialogue - Politics and the Media in Africa [column]
                                                             Daily Trust (Abuja)
                                                      February 6, 2012 Monday



Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 3099 words
Byline: Abubakar Siddique Mohammed

Body


Politics is an inevitable feature of any human society. In a general sense, it is the activity through which people
make, preserve and modify the general rules under which they live. Therefore, the important questions as to who
should get what, how resources are distributed, through which means are collective decisions arrived at, etc., fall
within the realm of politics. It is obvious that these weighty issues will inevitably stimulate disagreements within any
society- and they have led to wars or civil conflagration in many instances. Since there will always be rival opinions,
different wants, competing desires, opposing needs and interests and disagreements about rules which govern our
activities or under which people live, politics is inseparable from conflict. They are intricately linked. This reality
imposes on society the imperative for co-operation, more so when people realise that the rules and regulations
under which they live can be influenced, respected and sustained by working together. Thus, in a dialectical sense,
society is able to achieve another fundamental goal of politics: the taming or domestication of violence.

Politics is therefore an arena where various forces within society contend. In this, often intense, competition various
means are employed. One such resource is the media. The same way that conflict and co-operation are intricately
linked so also politics and the media, especially in our times. In a democracy, where the will of the people is
assumed to be supreme, politicians strive to use the media or means of mass communication to mobilise public
support, first to win elections and then to get their programmes sold to the public while in office. But the print and
electronic media are both organs which could be used not only to assist in legitimising and mobilising support for
governments, but also in running down governments. So important is the media in legitimising modern democracies
and the democratization process that it has been variously referred to as the Fourth Estate of the Realm; the
People's Parliament, etc. This is largely as a result of the media's utilitarian value as an institutional channel through
which opinions are expressed and public perceptions moulded. In addition to the media's functions of informing,
entertaining and instructing its target audience, it has also become an instrument of propaganda and the channel
through which public perception of its audience could be shaped, moderated, altered or influenced. Although the
media could be made to serve the general good, it could however, be used as a cover for the promotion of personal
or group interests. In this regard, it should be stressed that, apart from the traditional roles expected of media
organs, they are equally established to serve the specific interests of those who own and control them. In this
respect it could be suggested that, where the vested interests of those who own and control the media collide with
other interests, the media may be used in the services of its owners.

The defunct Concord could be a good illustration of this point. The paper was established to promote the interests
of its founder, Chief Moshood Abiola and those of the political party he belonged to, the National Party of Nigeria.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 5
                        Ninth Daily Trust Dialogue - Politics and the Media in Africa [column]

The paper was thus virulent in its attacks of the Unity Party of Nigeria led by Chief Obafemi Awolowo, which posed
a political challenge to the former. But when Chief Moshood Abiola left the NPN in 1982 over his failure to take over
the chair of the N.P.N from Chief Adisa Akinloye, as a prelude to a planned bid for the party's presidential ticket for
the 1983 presidential election, the paper dramatically changed its tune. The Concord and other outlets owned by
Chief Abiola launched a series of orchestrated, equally virulent attacks on the government of President Shehu
Shagari and even openly encouraged the military to take over. As you may remember, the military did overthrow
that government on 31st December 1983.

With the overthrow of the civilian regime by the military, Chief Abiola mobilised his media empire to justify the coup.
His journalists encouraged the new military rulers to be ruthless in the conduct of public affairs, especially with
regards to the fate of the deposed politicians, who were accused, tried, judged and sentenced on the pages of the
Abiola newspapers. The Sunday Concord, edited by Dele Giwa, played an important role in this campaign against
civilian politicians and anyone believed to be associated with them. Supporting the coup, this celebrated Nigerian
journalist wrote in his column, 'Parallax Snaps', of January 8th 1984, that

The soldiers couldn't have come a minute too early or a minute too late. Everybody in Shehu Shagari's bad books
was already getting hysterical.

In the first month of the regime, the Concord mounted a systematic campaign against civilians and the ousted
elected civilian regime. This campaign started in the paper's first editorial after the coup. It was captioned: The
Bottom Line is Performance. In this editorial, the newspaper advised the military junta to refuse civilians political
appointments. It argued:

Misgivings have already been expressed over the proposed inclusion of civilians in the new cabinet. The contention
centres on the fact that such civilians who might have had a romance with the [deposed] civilian administration
under which a fetish was made of corruption, might directly or indirectly have had their hand soiled in shady deals
and might only cast a slur on the white-linen appearance of the new administration.

Besides, as some of them might have had strong political loyalties and affiliations, they might still be nursing their
political hang-overs, and are therefore unlikely to serve the new government with unreserved commitment.
Moreover, as civilians are by nature often overtly bureaucratic in their approach to issues, their snail-pace
mannerism may not augur well for a military administration which had pledged itself to a speedy, no-nonsense
approach to solving the nation's festering multitude of problems.

In his column in the same edition of the Sunday Concord, Dele Giwa even urged the military government to take
extra-judicial measures to arrest and torture two leading members of the deposed ruling NPN party. These were
Chief Adisa Akinloye (who defeated Chief Abiola in the contest for the chairmanship of the NPN in 1982) and Alhaji
Umaru Dikko (who had openly campaigned for the victory of Chief Akinloye against Chief Abiola in the 1982
chairmanship contest). He wrote:

The military must get Akinloye especially. If diplomatic and other so-called legal means failed to produce Adisco,
the military must adopt the Gadhafi approach, and get professional kidnappers and assassins to his trail. They will
get him.

After getting him, they must then compel him, by bloody and slow torture, to disclose where he is keeping all the
money he stole from Nigeria. When he has told them where the money is being kept, he must be made to effect
instruments of transfer of the money to Nigeria.

If he is slow at complying, the kidnappers and assassins should ask him to indicate the hand he uses for writing.
They should then begin to break the fingers of his other hand one by one until he used his writing hand to sign the
instruments of transfer of the money to Nigeria.

As for Sunday Adewusi [the Inspector General of Police under the deposed civilian government], I have a personal
score to settle with the fellow. So, I would like to ask Major-General Buhari to oblige me by handing the fellow over
to me, and he can be sure that I would do justice to the usurper.

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                        Ninth Daily Trust Dialogue - Politics and the Media in Africa [column]

Even the "no-nonsense military regime" of Generals Buhari and Idiagbon apparently found this advice rather too
chilling. It is, however, not quite clear as to what role the recommendations offered by Dele Giwa and other leading
Concord journalists played in inciting the military to adopt repressive and reprehensible measures against the
deposed elected civilian government, including the botched abduction of Alhaji Umaru Dikko, a prominent political
opponent of Chief M. K. O. Abiola.

Chief Abiola's media vendetta against the deposed politicians went to such an extent that his newspapers started a
campaign for the banning of some politicians. In an editorial, in Sunday Concord, 22nd January 1984, shortly after
the military coup, captioned, "Future of Politics in Nigeria" the Sunday Concord said:

The vexed question as to whether politicians who have had a previous bad record in public life are to be forbidden
from participation in political activities, must now, in view of our recent unsavoury experience with this breed, be
resolved in the affirmative. The Shagaris, Dikkos, Akinloyes, and Ekwuemes should be banished from further
participation in politics. This nation has had enough run of ill-luck on account of them.

Ray Ekpu, another leading columnist of the Sunday Concord, would not be outdone. In an article titled, "Na
Democracy we go chop?", published in Sunday Concord of January 15 1984, Ekpu castigated both the West for
condemning the coup and the late Dr Tai Solarin for calling on the military to handover to civilians within six months.
According to him:

"It is easy to understand why the death of democracy in Nigeria has pained the western powers and their media so
much. Their funeral orations at Nigeria's democracy's graveside and their newspaper obituaries which pass for
commentaries must be dismissed as the hogwash that they are. What they think about democracy in Nigeria ought
to mean little or nothing to us. What matters is what we Nigerians think.

Democracy as we knew it these last four years was not democracy as they know it in their own countries. It was not
even a bastardised form of it, it was madness in it's pure form, madness that had no method to it... the mere fact
that it is the western powers that are the chief mourners of the death of Shagari's administration ought to be
instructive. For it tells us that government was a more devoted servant of the western interest than Nigerian
interests.

That is why it is difficult to appreciate Tai Solarin's view that nobody in this country wants to see an army regime
that would last more than six months.

Mr Solarin must be so much in love with democracy that he would have it at any price. That love has apparently
blinded him to the terrible experience of the last four years and the fact that the mounting heap of mess left behind
cannot be cleared within six months.

The other reason one can guess for Mr Solarin's wish for Nigeria is his avowed love for Awo and his (Tai's) desire
to see papa achieve his life-long ambition of ruling Nigeria. Mr Solarin realises that the longer the Military
administration hangs around the more Awo's chances ebb"

Just as African newspapers can be used openly by their owners as instruments of self-aggrandisement, so could
organs of the media be employed for more diabolical ends, as we have experienced in recent times in many
countries, such as Rwanda, Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire and Sudan, to mention but a few. We can illustrate this with the
example of the roles played by the Kangura newspaper and the Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines (RTLM)
(One Thousand Hills Free Radio and Television) which broadcast from July 8, 1993 to July 31, 1994 in the
Rwandan Genocide. According to the Human Rights Watch

In the thirteen weeks after April 6, 1994, at least half a million people perished in the Rwandan genocide, perhaps
as many as three quarters of the Tutsi population. At the same time, thousands of Hutu were slain because they
opposed the killing campaign and the forces directing it. The killers struck with a speed and devastation that
suggested an aberrant force of nature, "a people gone mad," said some observers. ..But this genocide was not an
uncontrollable outburst of rage by a people consumed by "ancient tribal hatreds." Nor was it the preordained result
of the impersonal forces of poverty and over-population.

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 5
                        Ninth Daily Trust Dialogue - Politics and the Media in Africa [column]

This genocide resulted from the deliberate choice of a modern elite to foster hatred and fear to keep itself in power.
This small, privileged group first set the majority against the 12.5

The radio was not left out. Indeed it became even more effective in delivering the message of hate directly and
simultaneously to a wide audience given that listening to the radio was a popular distraction among Rwandans both
the ordinary people and the elite. In 1991, some 29 percent of all households had a radio. To further galvanise the
people to effectively carry out its genocidal enterprise the government distributed radios free to some local
authorities before the genocide and perhaps after the killing had gone full gear Radio Mille Collins which was
established by forces, politicians, businessmen, bureaucrats etc associated with the regime was used extensively to
galvanise Hutus to kill Tutsi.

As the HRW report clearly indicates, the gargantuan tragedy, otherwise known as the Rwandan Genocide, was
deliberately planned by small, privileged elite, which prepared the grounds for its evil acts by mobilising the media
to manufacture and spread hatred against the group targeted for mass slaughter. In this sense, there is an eerie
resemblance between the pre- genocide discourse in the Rwandan, Akazu- controlled media and the on-going
campaign of hatred being championed by a powerful section of the Nigerian press against the peoples of Northern
Nigeria in general, and the Hausa and Fulani nationalities, in particular.

We can illustrate this campaign with the example of Dr Reuben Abati, formally a regular columnist in the Guardian
and now one of the advisers to President Goodluck Jonathan. In an article he wrote on page 53 of The Guardian,
Friday, February 25, 2000 titled, "The Second Jihad", Abati deliberately lied and otherwise distorted history by
claiming that:

Prior to 1804, the Fulanis had already emigrated to Northern Nigeria from Sudan and elsewhere, but they
constituted an outsider group, an alien constituency, and were so treated by their Hausa host -communities who
were not Muslims, but African animists. Transiting alien groups are often subjected to manifest psychological torture
and the Fulani's were not immune to this fact of social co-existence. A proud, aristocratic group, they resented their
hosts and sought power and more space.

The philosophy behind the jihad comprises the following elements: the destruction of anything possible that seems
to give advantages to the opposition, the stealing of those advantages and their eventual appropriation, a
determination to cause mayhem through any means, fear of primordial isolation, and desperation for power.

These are the same elements behind the Second Jihad. The same fear of isolation and helplessness that set the
Fulani aliens against the Hausas are reproduced in the enthronement of democratic rule and the cry of
marginalisation that is currently issuing forth from the North. The marginalisation that is spoken of is not in terms of
physical representation in political offices that is the problem of the Igbo) but the manner in which democratic rule
has removed the dirty hands of Northern opportunists from the treasury and other sources of easy wealth which has
served that class very well.

We are not opposed to Islam but we think anybody who lives in a decent society must obey the rules of that society.
It is not religion that they seek to promote but their own craving for power.

The Jihadists are leaving us with no option but war. Their stubbornness raises further questions about citizenship.
Are these persons citizens of Nigeria? What does it mean to be a citizen of this country? My other suspicion is that
the Northern Jihadists do not consider themselves to be citizens of this country. They belong to a religious kingdom,
and they have more loyalty to the Arab world than to Nigeria.

For too long, the progressive camp in this country has had to compromise too many things for the simple sake of
ensuring peace. But what we have also seen is that there are people in this country who do not want peace. It is the
tendency to accept easy compromises for example that helped to create the myth that Northerners are in the
majority in this country, whereas a trip to the North reveals more empty spaces and herds of cattle than human
beings.

                                                                                                          Page 5 of 5
                        Ninth Daily Trust Dialogue - Politics and the Media in Africa [column]

Dr Abati is not alone in this virulent hate campaign. Earlier on, the late Chief Bola Ige and the Sunday Tribune
seemed to have taken a strategic decision to propagate hatred against the Fulani in particular and northerners in
general. Chief Bola Ige used every opportunity to liken the Fulani to the Tutsis of Rwanda and sometimes Burundi.
As the Tutsis of Nigeria he provocatively proclaimed that the Fulani of Nigeria are likely to end up sharing the same
bloody fate with the Tutsis of Rwanda. Like in Rwanda where the Tutsi were identified as the target group and
blamed for all the ills of society, Chief Bola Ige insistently identified the Fulani as evil oppressors and parasites and
therefore the target for genocide in Nigeria. On page 2 of Sunday Tribune of February 16, 1977 he wrote:

"Since 1960, has our bane not been the "Tutsis" of Nigeria (who are minority of minorities - in population, in
education, in management skills, in the economy) have held Nigeria at the jugular scheming political manoeuvres
that make them hold on to power at all costs and in all circumstance? The result, of course, is that all "non Tutsis" of
Nigeria are not ready to trust their future to such a minority who have never exhibited true Nigerian
nationalism...The young people do not trust the authorities, and the way they see Nigeria is vastly different from
how the "Tutsis" of Nigeria want Nigeria to be."

Clearly, as highlighted at the beginning of this contribution, politics is occasioned by conflict and the media is not
immune to this process. It is similarly true that the struggle for economic and political space amongst our numerous
competing elites will create frictions which will determine the nature and direction of our political discourse.
However, the genocide in Rwanda was real. Nearly one million Africans were massacred within thirteen weeks. We
should also not forget that editors, reporters, columnists and other media actors were the main catalysts in the hate
campaign which led to the tragedy. Leading practitioners of the media in Nigeria should therefore ask themselves,
must Rwanda be our role model?

Dr. Abubakar Siddique Mohammed is the Centre for Democratic Development Research and Training, Jama'a,
Zaria.


Load-Date: February 6, 2012


  
