

                                                                                                            Page 1 of 3
                  Insecurity - I Live in Constant Fear of the Next Attack - Nma, Father of Two [analysis]




  Insecurity - I Live in Constant Fear of the Next Attack - Nma, Father of Two
                                    [analysis]
                                                             Leadership (Abuja)
                                                       March 17, 2012 Saturday



Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 993 words
Byline: Binta Abdulazeez Idris

Body


Nigeria in recent times is witnessing an upsurge in terror-related attacks. This is not entirely new but the dimension
it has taken and the nature of weapons being used by these terror groups have created fear in the minds of people.

writes on what people are going through because of these attacks.

Mallam Salihu Nma a father of two says he has drastically cut down on outings for the family for fear of the
unknown. He said "before now, every other weekend I would take my boys to the amusement park or find
something fun to do with them but now I stay home simply because who knows when the next bomb will strike?

We are so used to hearing about bombs these days that it's no longer news anymore The other day my son asked
me how come they haven't caught the people behind the bombings, I told him the government is in charge and will
do that soon and this is where our government must step in, to help its citizens especially victims, not to live in
fear."

The history of recent bomb blasts in Nigeria could be traced to 1986, during the military regime of General Ibrahim
Badamasi Babangida, when ace journalist, Dele Giwa, was killed by letter bomb in his home in Lagos. There was
also an isolated case of accidental bomb explosion at the Ikeja Cantonment in 2002, which claimed hundreds of
lives.

There was also a bomb blast on October 1, 2010, during Nigeria's 50th Independence anniversary celebrations in
Abuja. On January 1, 2011 there was a blast at Mammy market in Abuja. Also on April 8, 2011, the Independent
National Electoral Commission (INEC) office in Suleja, Niger State was also bombed.

Another blast occurred on April 26, 2011, in Maiduguri, the Borno State capital. An Army barracks in Bauchi was hit
by bomb blast on May 29, 2011, while the Police Headquarters in Abuja was bombed by a suicide bomber on June
16, 2011 the list goes on and on.

Nigeria is one of the countries highly affected by all forms of violence. The scale and intensity of violence have
increased in the past few years bomb blasts, abductions, assassinations, etc. has become common occurrence in
the country.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 3
                Insecurity - I Live in Constant Fear of the Next Attack - Nma, Father of Two [analysis]

Violence now pervades the social and cultural life and has made the country become one of the most dangerous
zones in the world, and can massively affect the mental health of the people.

Terrorism has no generally acceptable definition; just as who is a terrorist is debatable, a terrorist is someone who
uses violence, especially bombing, kidnapping, and assassination to intimidate others often for political purposes
any act intended to cause death or serious bodily harm to civilians or non-combatants with the purpose of
intimidating a population or compelling a government or an international organization to do or abstain from doing
any act.

LEADERSHIP WEEKEND spoke to Dr Ahmed Balogun a consultant psychiatrist at Pristine hospital Abuja "the
impact is mainly shock and acute stress reaction. As you know, Nigerians would not see a psychiatrist for
evaluation after experiencing some form of traumatic event in their lives and these things have a way of affecting
one sometimes long after the actual event.

Some are faced with , eating and sleeping problems, headaches, cognitive confusion, poor concentration, memory
difficulties, distressing dreams or nightmares, intrusive thoughts or images" he said.

He added " Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is an intense, prolonged and sometimes delayed reaction to an
intensely stressful event. The core symptoms are hyper-arousal, insomnia, poor concentration, irritability and
persistent anxiety"

Mrs. Joyce Nwokedi a teacher also said "in my opinion, this mess we are experiencing in this country is a fall out of
youth restiveness; unemployment rate is increasing everybody wants a government job because we all want a
piece of the national cake as our leaders display ill-gotten wealth which they flaunt shamelessly. So tell me, why
won't we have anarchy all around us?

Explaining further, Joyce said the purpose of terrorism is simply to garner attention.

Mr. Aaron Deinde, also a teacher sees terrorism as a strategy to get the much needed attention, saying that
emotional aggression, associated with anger, are what translates to these attacks on lives and property. "there are
direct and indirect victims involved when we have such attacks- the survivors of the violent events or the injured;
those who were present or nearby, those who were exposed to the trauma as a result of their attempts to help
victims also face some kind of psychological reactions.

I remember when the bomb at a church in Madalla went off for some days I couldn't sleep without having a
nightmare. Some nights i would jump up from my sleep out of fear ,even when I didn't witness the occurrence first-
hand. What about those that did?he said

leadership weekend also spoke to a police officer who said "more still needs to be done there should be critical
stress management programmes in place such as education on stress management, outreach to those affected,
crisis counselling, distribution of materials on stress reactions, not only to civilians, but to men in uniforms as well.

You won't believe it but some of my colleagues in Kano state don't wear their uniforms because they have also
become cherries for picking for these groups and it is sad." He also suggested that, "there should be moral
reawakening that is reduction in the socio-economic gap between the rich and the poor; provision of jobs to the
army of idle youths as well as reorientation programmes for everyone if possible."

There are also management challenges, which he listed to include, "lack of adequate awareness and, inadequate
resources? He added that mental health experts were grossly inadequate to cope with the impending catastrophe.

Terrorism is a leading global problem; it has political, socio-economic and health implications. Unfortunately Nigeria
has joined the league of nations affected by this ugly trend and something must be done to stop it.


Load-Date: March 19, 2012

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 3
             Insecurity - I Live in Constant Fear of the Next Attack - Nma, Father of Two [analysis]




