

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 3
                                           The Legal Challenge of Insurgency [analysis]




                             The Legal Challenge of Insurgency [analysis]
                                                              This Day (Lagos)
                                                             November 17, 2014



Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1689 words

Body


It is pertinent to recall that the Generals Ibrahim Babangida and Sani Abacha juntas were associated with terrorist
attacks of political opponents through state-sponsored bombing, assassination and arson. The late Chief Gani
Fawehinmi (SAN) was almost killed in 1987 for demanding the prosecution of the terrorists who killed a prominent
journalist, Dele Giwa, by a parcel bomb. The era equally witnessed the mock trial and execution of military officers
who were implicated in phantom coups. Cultist groups were funded on the campuses to deal with radical lecturers
and students. Upon the restoration of civil rule in 1999 the official terrorists were neither prosecuted nor disarmed!

The official manipulation of religion, which commenced under the Babangida junta, has continued unabated.
Indeed, it is the root cause of terrorism in the country. Whereas it is stipulated in section 10 of the Constitution that
the State shall not adopt any official religion the federal, state and local governments have adopted the Islamic and
Christian religions. In 1986, Babangida surreptitiously registered Nigeria as a member of the Organisation of Islamic
Conference (OIC). As if that was not enough, he built a mosque in the Presidential Villa and appointed an Imam to
man it. Similarly, President Olusegun Obasanjo erected a chapel in the villa and appointed a chaplain to manage it.

On January 27, 2000, the Sharia Law was introduced in Zamfara State by Governor Sani Yerima. Not less than 15
other governors in the North followed suit. Although the action constituted a clear violation of section 10 of the
Constitution, it was a political move designed to win votes in a Muslim-dominated region. The Obasanjo
administration decided not to approach the court to test the constitutional validity of the policy so as not to lose the
votes in the North in the 2003 general election. Believing that Nigeria had become an Islamic state, many
misguided persons set up private militias to promote the policy of the state governments. In 2011, the Goodluck
Jonathan administration set up a Panel of Inquiry headed by Ambassador Usman Galtimari to investigate the
insurgency in the North-east region. In a painstaking investigation, the panel traced the genesis of Boko Haram and
other private militias to politicians who set them up in the run-up to the 2003 general election. According to the
Committee:

"The militias were allegedly armed and used extensively as political thugs. After the elections and having achieved
their primary purpose, the politicians left the militias to their fate since they could no longer continue funding and
keeping them employed. With no visible means of sustenance, some of the militias gravitated toward religious
extremism, the type by Mohammed Yussuf." In line with its terms of reference, the committee recommended that
the politicians who "sponsored, funded and used the militia groups that later metamorphosed into Boko Haram" be
brought to justice. Although the recommendation was accepted in May 2012 by the federal government, the
suspects have been treated like sacred cows as they are said to be highly connected to the powers that be.
Recently, a former Borno State Governor, Alhaji Modu Ali Sheriff, was named as one of the sponsors of the Boko

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 3
                                    The Legal Challenge of Insurgency [analysis]

Haram sect by a Reverend Stephen Davies, the negotiator recruited by the federal government to dialogue with the
terrorists. In his reaction to the disclosure, the ex-governor threatened to sue Davies for defamation in Australia.

Unlike the negotiator whose indictment was not substantiated, I issued a press statement wherein I provided
detailed evidence of Sheriff's links with the dreaded Boko Haram sect. In particular, I stated that the ex-governor
appointed Alhaji Buji Foi, a leading Boko Haram member, as the Borno State Commissioner for Religious Affairs to
compensate the sect for supporting his re-election in 2003. My press statement was supported by the Maiduguri
branch of the Nigerian Bar Association (NBA) which threatened to drag the ex-governor to the Special Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court. As the federal government was disturbed by the revelations of Davies, the State
Security Service (SSS) announced that the ex-governor was under investigation for his alleged links with the Boko
Haram sect. But a few days later, the suspect was a member of the delegation of the federal government to Chad
when President Jonathan met with his Chadian counterpart, Mr. Idriss Derby, to review the war on terror in the
North-east region.

Insurgency and the threat to National Security Notwithstanding the sacrifice of the ill-equipped members of the
armed forces, the Boko Haram sect appears to have gained the upper hand in the war on terror. Large towns like
Bama, Gwoza, Mubi and Michika and hundreds of villages have been captured by the terrorists. Hundreds of
thousands of people have been displaced while not less than 13,000 have been killed by the criminal gang. Not less
than 16 local governments in Borno, Yobe and Adamawa States have been annexed while the combined land mass
of the occupied areas is said to be 21,545 square kilometres of territory. The terrorists have hoisted their flags in the
occupied territory which has been named the "Caliphate Republic". Out of the 276 girls abducted from the
Government College in Chibok, Borno State, six months ago, 57 escaped while 219 remain captive. More women
and school girls have been kidnapped by the sect. For instance, 60 women were abducted when the sect members
invaded Waga Mangoro and Garba villages in Adamawa State last month. (See Punch, October 22, 2014). When
Mubi in Adamawa State was attacked, about 350 children were declared missing. (Leadership, November 2, 2014).
Bomb attacks launched by the sect have killed hundreds of people in Niger, Bauchi, Gombe, Kano, Kaduna,
Nassarawa, Plateau States and the Federal Capital Territory (FCT).

But despite the increasing deadly attacks of the sect, the National Assembly has not deemed it fit to hold a special
joint sitting on the threat to the corporate existence of the nation. On its own part, the Council of State which met in
Abuja on November 4, 2014 commended President Jonathan's handling of the war on terror. According to Governor
Godswill Akpabio of Akwa Ibom State, "Council was satisfied that the Defence Ministry and all the other agencies
have taken the right steps and the president is on course and we are very hopeful that sooner or later Nigerians will
hear good news." (Premium Times November 5, 2014).

The Legal Challenge The arrogance of the ruling class enshrined in section 2 of the Constitution to the effect that
Nigeria is "one indivisible and indissoluble sovereign state" has been exposed to ridicule by the terrorists. However,
in exercise of his powers under section 305 of the Constitution, President Jonathan imposed a state of emergency
on Adamawa, Borno and Yobe States to restore law and order in the North-east region. The implication of
emergency rule is that some of the fundamental rights enshrined in the constitution may be justifiably encroached
upon in the interest of defence, public safety and public order. In Babankura Fugu v. President, Federal Republic of
Nigeria (2009 -2010) CHR 1 at 10 the Borno State High Court awarded N100 million damages to the applicant to
atone for the extra judicial murder of his father, an alleged terrorist suspect . In the same vein, in Hadiza Bala
Usman & Ors. v. Inspector-General of Police (unreported) the FCT High Court declared illegal and unconstitutional
the decision of the controversial police officer, AIG Joseph Mbu, to ban the rally staged daily by the
#bringbackourgirls campaigners. Since the neo-colonial state has failed to provide for the "security and welfare of
the people" as required by section 14(2) of the constitution, the terrorists have overrun the North-east region. No
doubt, the military authorities are embarrassed that soldiers vamoose at the sight of the terrorists. But instead of
charging those soldiers with mutiny, the defence chiefs ought to have asked the government to comply with Section
217(2) of the Constitution which stipulates that the federation shall "equip and maintain the armed forces as may be
considered adequate and effective" for the defence of Nigeria from external aggression and the maintenance of its
territorial integrity.

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 3
                                  The Legal Challenge of Insurgency [analysis]

Towards the defeat of Terrorism Last month, the federal government announced a ceasefire with the Boko Haram
sect and assured the nation that arrangements had been concluded for the release of the Chibok girls. The Boko
Haram sect denounced the so-called agreement and has continued to unleash mayhem on innocent people. Since
it is crystal clear that the ceasefire was a ruse, the Chief of Defence Staff (CDS), Air Marshal Barde, who
announced it should be directed to resign his appointment. To fight the scourge of insurgency, the Nigerian people
should demand a wholesale re-organisation of the armed forces and a probe of the huge funds earmarked for the
nation's defence in the last five years. The National Assembly should ensure that the $1 billion loan recently
approved for the purchase of military hardware is judiciously utilised by the federal government. The members of
the Joint Task Force should be motivated through training as well as prompt payment of their salaries and
allowances. Those who lose their lives in the battlefield should not be buried in unmarked graves.

In view of the patriotic role of the civilian Joint Task Force (JTF) in liberating and securing some towns in the
occupied territory, the youths in the North-east region should be mobilised to flush out the terrorists from their
communities. While we advocate that the armed forces be adequately funded, we suggest that the federal and state
governments should religiously implement the policy on the provision of compulsory and free universal basic
education for every Nigerian child. The government should also embark on genuine empowerment programmes
and job creation for our army of unemployed youths. - Mr. Falana (SAN) is a member of THISDAY Editorial Board


Load-Date: November 17, 2014


  
