

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 3
                       It's Unfortunate We Have Recycled Leadership in Power - Ajakaye [interview]




It's Unfortunate We Have Recycled Leadership in Power - Ajakaye [interview]
                                                      Daily Independent (Lagos)
                                                        July 23, 2011 Saturday



Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1630 words
Byline: Yaqoub Popoola

Body


, the bishop of Ekiti Catholic Diocese, in this interview with Correspondent,

, speaks on the controversial minimum wage, insecurity in Nigeria and other burning national issues. Excerpts...

It is quite unfortunate. What we should have done we did not do when Boko Haram first raised its ugly head.
Instead of going to the root cause of the so-called struggle, we decided to start where we should not start. The
leader of the Boko Haram was arrested and killed. We did not investigate the brains behind this because there must
be some powerful people behind that struggle. Till now, we have not got to the origin of the whole thing. Some
people are now apologising to them; that is not how to go about it.

Apologising to criminals? In an ideal society, the governors apologising would have been interrogated by the
security agents. It is unfortunate that this is happening in our society and we are not helping the matter. Our security
agents speak more but little action; they threaten others that are deficient. It was when the Inspector General of
Police (IGP), Hafiz Ringim, threatened that they were battle-ready that those people took the battle to his doorsteps.
Even if you are planning, security strategy should not be discussed on the pages of newspapers, radio and
television. But assure the people that you will try to curb; don't blow your ego. When you blow your ego, the enemy
is not happy; you don't even know the enemy.

When soldiers go to war, in the bush, they use camouflage. That is what security is all about. Before election, there
were some candidates, both presidential and vice presidential, blowing hot that "if we lose, you will see what will
happen". In an ideal society, they would be investigated and tried. Words are golden; you have to think and weigh
what you say before you say it. To me, our security agents should know how to be real security agents. You don't
present your strategies. Even a football team would not present its tactics, so that the opponent would not know the
tactic. But it is only in Nigeria that you see our security men blowing siren here and there. If there are some armed
robbers somewhere, instead of the police to go there quietly, they are blowing siren. What is the meaning of that? I
am coming; to chase them away or for them to be prepared. There is what we call undercover security tactics. We
are not tactical and these people are out to destroy the government of President Goodluck Jonathan.

When we should be planning strategies - economic, political - and putting in place structures, the man (President
Jonathan) is busy thinking about security. When there is insecurity in the land, the land cannot progress. I pity the
president and I pity us too. It is not just for the security agencies; it is for all of us. Some people are saying that
there should be compromise. What sort of compromise with criminals by God's grace? If we do that, all of us are

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 3
                    It's Unfortunate We Have Recycled Leadership in Power - Ajakaye [interview]

under threat. Honestly, it is sad that we are wasting ourselves. The human life is of dignity; it is only in this country
that I see that the life of a chicken is more important than the life of a human being. Who will come and invest in a
place where there is no security? This is why I said powerful people are behind these bombings and they are out to
derail the administration of the president.

It is unfortunate that the first bomb we would hear of was on October 1986 that killed Dele Giwa; till today, we don't
know the killers. Bombs are becoming a kind of toys. This is not acceptable; those who are behind it should be
fished out. If a driver drives carelessly, the driver should be arrested, not the conductor. Our country should not be
like other countries; we should be one. Look at the newest country in the world, the South Sudan; about two million
people died during the war between the North and South Sudan. Is this where we are going? This is why it is sad
because we should be enjoying the fruits of democracy. Some people may say I am wrong. The last election
opened the door of democratically-elected government, transition from selected civilian government to elected
democratic government. We must give kudos to Professor Attahiru Jega, the president and Nigerians for the
success we recorded during the election.

That the National Assembly passed the FoI bill and the president appending his signature is a victory to the society.
The society now has the right to know what is going on within and outside the government, and anybody holding a
public office is under obligation to give feedback to the people. Having been passed and signed into law, each state
assembly is expected to domesticate it, meaning that the state is prepared to operate openly. That Ekiti House of
Assembly just inaugurated and decided to domesticate it means that the state is ready to operate the law. I felt sad
that Ogun House of Assembly comprising who should know what should be done now say that only media
organisations of the state-owned media should cover their affairs; it is going back to the Dark Age. I had expected
the media, the state governor and the NUJ (Nigeria Union of Journalists) to have issued a statement to condemn it
and to take these people up. We should not allow that. Even if we don't have the FoI Act, we should not allow this to
happen in our society. We are in a democracy and democracy means openness. If there is an abuse, there should
be disabuse, not that you now pass a law and say that if a journalist of a media organisation erred, you should not
hit the people with a hammer; it is not done that way because people have the right to know; they should not gag
them. This is why journalists have a great role to play. This is a new dawn; there must be a new attitude. I
encourage other state governments to emulate Ekiti.

The background of a person matters and that is why I have been saying that there should be a searchlight on
people who want to lead us. It is very important to know their antecedents. Political position is a sensitive position
because today's president could be tomorrow's prisoner and today's prisoner could be tomorrow's president. That is
why we need to be very careful. The FoI Act should not just be a paper; it should be actualised and the way to
actualise it is that the journalist should be up and doing. There should be no room for armchair journalism
anymore. In the past, we used to say 'publish and be damned'; but this time around, let us publish with
responsibility. If there is information that is dangerous, that could dent the integrity and security of the land, any
journalist that worth his name should know that that should not be published. The FoI Act is a baby that should be
tenderly taken care of. Anybody who is gagging the press is not fit to be a democrat.

It will affect governance in the state. If the president has signed the bill into law having been passed by the National
Assembly, a state now says no and decides to go against the Federal Government amounts to felony. We are in a
country that has law. People will now be very careful; they will now know that it is not business-as-usual. A
journalist who will make a research will carry it to the logical conclusion and follow it up. The FoI Act has
empowered journalists to follow up stories, to make research. I have been saying that if the media people go on
strike for one day, the whole world would be like a cemetery; so journalists have serious impact in the society.

This is serious because many of them are not well paid, not well catered for. They have noses and help the society
to know what is going on and that is why the society should appreciate them too. Also, a good journalist should not
lose his integrity, the dignity. Don't destroy your tomorrow today because today determines tomorrow. I am happy
with the FoI Act, but I will be happier if it is practised as it should.

Who are those that are there? It is not just a matter of the civil servants; there are certain things that a journalist
can know if he wants to, and that is why a journalist must be nosy. The law is there; it is not a respecter of any

                                                                                                          Page 3 of 3
                    It's Unfortunate We Have Recycled Leadership in Power - Ajakaye [interview]

person including me. We follow the law and stand by it. There are ways we can get rid of them if we are more
united. If everybody is afraid, timid, we will not be able to do what we should do. All of us can stand up to fight evil;
there is no human factor that cannot be surpassed.

The problem would not have arisen if it had been well discussed. You don't just bring out policy statement. Some
people in Abuja cannot just sit down there and be formulating policies and laws without knowing their country. Even
for a parish to be created, particularly in this diocese, the priests and the lay people there would be invited to know
whether they have the strength. The Vatican will make thorough investigation of the population, the financial
strength, the spiritual aspect of it and the economic strength would be considered. And you don't rush into it
because when you rush in you will also rush out. I could remember when we had one Minister of Petroleum and
there was a law that we should not be buying petrol in jerry cans. He was addressing journalists and one journalist
had to ask him: "Okay, what if I have a generator, that generating set is using petrol, and there is no petrol, will I
remove the tank or bring the generating set to the filling station because I want to buy petrol? Or what of if my car,
the fuel finishes on the road, will I remove the car's tank and bring it to the station?" And the minister said "we did
not think about that". This is the type of people we have in government and it's unfortunate. It is also unfortunate
that we have recycled leadership in power. I appeal that let us have peace and harmony; but there cannot be peace
and harmony without justice.


Load-Date: July 26, 2011


  
