

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 2
                                        When a 'Senior Advocate of the Media' Departed




                          When a 'Senior Advocate of the Media' Departed
                                                             Daily Trust (Abuja)
                                                             November 03, 2013



Copyright 2013 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 921 words
Byline: Desmond Ikemefuna Mgboh

Body


A great journalist, Augustine Madu-West, has departed. For 30 years or more, he practised the profession with
uncommon flair. He lived for it, morning and evening, day and night. But only last month, he decided to take a leave
of an exciting career. He decided to part with journalism, the things of this world, his friends and family, to the
silence of the other world.

We will miss him in so many ways. Journalists in Kano and the entire North will surely miss this doyen, who
retained the spotlight of excellence for so long, who severally taught us to face the truth and write about it in an
everyday style that excites and delights our readers across the country.

We will miss his insights on nearly every human topic under the sun, the same way we will long for his wisdom on
how to get the best of news stories and hit the front pages. But it is his calm disposition; no matter the shock and
uncertainties; that we will miss most.

He epitomised an unstressed personality at every turn of the things of this world. Rain or sun, none terrified nor
provoked him. He remained the same: Augustine Madu-West. In the end, he died the easy way, on the night of
September 12 at his residence somewhere on Dakata Road in Kano State.

When I met him about 22 years ago he touched my life with friendship and profound words. I had always wanted to
be a journalist. I had written severally in my university days, edited the leading campus magazine, memorised the
names of reputed professionals and learnt by heart, the writing styles of such erudite writers like Dele Giwa, Edwin
Madunagu and Olatunji Dare; but West strengthened my resolve to go for journalism and proof my worth.

How time miraculously flies away like a dove in the sky! It looked like only yesterday, but it is a long time gone; time
gone forever.

In the years that went by, he was my brother and abiding friend. We ate together severally. We drank water from
similar cups. We also laughed a lot. And surprisingly, we disagreed on a number of topics and times. But we rarely
fought in the open, no matter the pressure.

Though we worked as colleagues and laboured on the news beat together, he had the upper hand and dictated the
pace of work. Importantly too, he assisted my graceful exit as editor of Arts and Life at the Triumph Newspapers,
Kano, to my first real stint as a reporter and correspondent.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 2
                                  When a 'Senior Advocate of the Media' Departed

In those days, as younger correspondents, excited by every byline attributed to us, each morning, we assembled in
his office at the Punch in Kano. Each day broke with a traditional visit to the newsstand where we saw the headlines
for lead stories. It was pure joy to lead your paper. Augustine Madu-West led the northern edition of the Punch like
no other writer had ever done nor will ever do. At times, especially in times of national upheavals, Madu-West would
remain for days on the front pages of the Punch.

Those were the best of times for this towering media spirit. Nothing distracted his attention. He was happy!

Among his numerous stories, he delightfully remembered how he reported the death of Gloria Okon. It was a
celebrated drug saga uncovered during the reign of General Ibrahim Babangida. He was at the Mallam Aminu Kano
International Airport, Kano when the drama unfolded. The second was the gruesome murder of the late Igbo trader,
Gideon Akaluka by Islamic extremists in the ancient city of Kano. Like others, he was angered to no end when he
saw the head of the victim hung on stick on the street of Kano.

Like most journalists, he reported for other media houses, including the Daily Independent and National Mirror,
where he worked until his death. And while the Punch was proscribed, West wrote under the pen name, Ben Green.

His friends and contacts grew in number; hence he was respectfully addressed as a senior advocate of the media.

On the day he died, I saw angels come alive in countless persons and faces. Among gloomy faces at his home I
saw those who were employed because he dropped a note, those who paid their last school fees with his additional
N3, 000. I also saw relatives whose future had become uncertain because he is no more. We were truly
heartbroken.

But more than these lessons, I also learnt from Madu-West that it pays to be a nationalist. He was one. He did not
remember tribe, region or religion. He would rather make sacrifices to other groups so as not to disrupt the love and
friendship of a united people. He would always say, "At my age there are things I should not be doing."

I remember that Harmattan season, some eight years ago, when all the non- indigenous journalists practising in
Kano State revolted against political marginalisation in our chapel. We spoke in one voice, wrote petitions to Abuja,
fought for our rights and were listened to, at least partially. The only person that truly remained neutral in the course
of the struggle was Augustine Madu-West. He refused all persuasions to join the fray.

Today, he is mourned by all and sundry, but mostly by the Hausa/Fulani and Muslim journalists in the state who
have been crying more than his kinsmen.

Today, as I look back to those good old days with a heart full of nostalgia, all I have is the pang of irreplaceable
memories and a wave of shocking grief. Augustine Madu-West, as you await your final journey to mother earth on
November 15, 2013, I hold it to be true that one day we shall meet again. And when that day comes, I will gladly be
your friend again. Adieu, the Chief!

Desmond Ikemuefuna Mgboh is a staff member of the Sun Newspapers in Kano.


Load-Date: November 4, 2013


  
