

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 5
              Dr. Paulyn Walley-Daniels Ghanaian lady who became Nigeria 's first female sports reporter




 Dr. Paulyn Walley-Daniels Ghanaian lady who became Nigeria's first female
                              sports reporter
                                                         The Sun (Nigeria)
                                                     June 21, 2014 Saturday



Copyright 2014 The Sun Publishing Limited Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company All Rights Reserved




Length: 2190 words

Byline: ENYERIBE EJIOGU , enyeribee@yahoo.com

Body


Nigeria and Ghana go back a very long way, with hundreds of thousands of strands making up the strong cord that
binds the two nations. If it is not about the number of pre- Independence generation of Nigerians that attended the
elite Achimota College, Ghana, then you could enumerate some notable Nigerians like Mike Awoyinfa, pioneer
Managing Director and Editor-in-Chief of The Sun Publishing Limited, who was born and raised in the land of the
famous Osei Tutu and Osei Bonso, renowned ancient kings of Ashanti, from whom leadership ultimately passed
through several generations to Kwame Nkrumah, Jerry Rawlings and John Kuffour. Mention can also be made of
Frank Nneji, whose company, ABC Transport Plc, daily ferries Nigerians to Accra, Ghana by road.

Pentecostal gospel minister, Dr. Paulyn Walley-Daniels, who is based in the United States of America is one of the
strands in the strong Nigeria-Ghana cord. With a Ph.D in pulpit communications she was born and raised in Ghana
of a Ghanaian father and Nigerian mother from Yoruba land. Then at the height of Ghana's economic crisis, the
family relocated to Nigeria. While here she cut her journalism teeth at the Concord media group where she learnt
the tradecraft, and in the process became the first female sports reporter in Nigeria and probably in Africa.

Today, she is an evangelist with a strong bias for writing books, though she also writes gospel songs for soul-
winning purposes and therefore not commercially available. Recently, she came to Nigeria for the funeral of her late
mother. During the trip she ministered at The Foursquare Gospel Church and at an event held by the William
Badejo Foundation, and had a chat with Sunday Sun.

Excerpts...

Give us a snapshot of your background.

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 5
            Dr. Paulyn Walley-Daniels Ghanaian lady who became Nigeria 's first female sports reporter

Well. I'm an evangelist and I run a Christian ministry in the United States. I have a Ph.D in Pulpit Communications
and Expository Preaching. I am married to a very handsome man. I have written a lot of books, and still writing. I
publish

at least two books a year, because writing was my original calling. When God called me into writing, He said I
should go through journalism. So I was a journalist for a decade.

Where did you practice?

I practiced journalism here in Lagos in Concord Newspapers from 1982 to 1991 before I went to

London and continued there. In Lon- don, I went to University of East Lon- don for one year. I was there for about
six months. I studied journalism but then I was a visiting student, because I started in the middle of the semester.
Then I got a recommendation, based on my performance, and transferred to University of Wales, Cardiff. So I was
there for a year for the Masters' degree programme. After I completed it, I began writing songs.

You wrote songs but you never recorded?

Actually I did record my songs; I have three CDs. They are basically gospel songs. I concentrated on writing both
songs and writing books as well as holding training seminars. To utilize my journalism background I started
publishing a magazine, though it was not for sale. It was only used to project and promote the work of my
Pentecostal ministry.

So you were in full time ministry at the time?

Yes, I was in full time ministry, but concentrated on writing songs, which I sang during ministrations. Beyond writing
songs and singing, I was preaching and teaching the word. You could say I was doing everything together - what I
call journalistic evangelism, which was not a popular thing.

Tell me more about your journalistic career which started here in Nigeria. Which beat did you cover?

Interestingly, I studied at the Nigerian Institute of Journalism (NIJ) for two years. I started writing before I went to
NIJ. I wrote poetry and drama.

When was that?

I started writing from the late 70s. Back then I had one major challenge - my scripts were always missing whenever
I gave them out for editing. Sometimes the people I gave my works to edit stole them and claimed that they were
lost. Then after some- time they would publish my works under their name. But I could not prove ownership of the
published works because I did not have the original manuscripts, which I had given out to them. It is unlike the
present time, when you can only give out the copy. At that time in Africa we lacked the resources to protect
intellectual property. But today

If I still had my early works in poetry and drama, certainly they could have elevated me. By the time I went to
England, I wrote what could pass as my biography, which gave an account of how I got into writing and other
aspects of my life and upbringing. I summoned courage and published it despite all the grammatical errors in it. My
grammar was not good at the time. There were other laxities too. For instance, a more mature writer would have left
out certain information that I published in the book. When I launched the book in London, 200 people attended the
event held at Christ Chapel, Brixton in East London.

People read it and were very impressed by what I said in the book. They didn't know I revealed family secrets - as
far as they were concerned I was telling the truth as it was. The book was entitled, Authority of the Overcomer. I
have travelled around the world - Africa, the Caribbean, Indian sub-continent, parts of Europe, the America, etc. As
I toured and people read the book they became more enlightened. But several of these people told me some of the
information were too personal to be in the book and advised that I re-edit the book and remove a lot of the personal

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 5
            Dr. Paulyn Walley-Daniels Ghanaian lady who became Nigeria 's first female sports reporter

information because some day, when I would have become globally known and in the news, some people could
use such information to attack me.

You see, I have a Nigerian mother and a Ghanaian father, but I was raised as a Ghanaian in Ghana before my
parents came to Nigeria to reside during the period of Ghana's economic downturn. So I took the advice of the
people who read the book, re-edited the book and also refined the lan guage. I engaged a professional editor, who
explained the modalities of writing to me. This helped me greatly to improve my skills and I was able to write much
better.

You said earlier that you are of Ghanaian and Nigerian parentage. Please ex- plain that.

I don't want to go deep into that, but I have a broad immigration background within my extended family. We have
people from different parts of the world, who settled in different places at different times; so you find people who
have chosen to say, this is where I want to be identified with. So some choose to be Ghanaians while some say
they are Nigerians and we are still one big loving family not minding the passports we carry. Now looking at my
parents, both of them were born in Ghana.

I am a third-generation Ghanaian, which is where I was born and raised. I came to Nigeria at a point in my life, and
stayed in Nigeria for one decade and practiced journalism here. But I still wouldn't say that I am a Nigerian because
am a third generation Ghanaian. On this issue I prefer to talk about myself only, because I don't want to offend
anybody in my larger family. I am married to an American. I see myself as an international citizen, but I don't want
to lose

my origins. To be able to adapt to members of my extended family from different parts of the world, I would say that
I'm an international person, but I wouldn't reject anybody because I love Nigerians, because part of my family are
Nigerians.

Are your parents still alive?

My mother died recently and my dad went back to Ghana.

Prior to coming for the burial of your mother, when was your last trip to Nigeria?

It was in September, 2013.

Let's go back to your journalism experience. How did it start off?

I started practicing journalism here in Nigeria in 1982 when I wrote my first poetry piece for Daily Times. I met a
man who is a professor now at University of Lagos. He was in NIJ at the time and one of the first people I related to.
I told him that I liked writing and he asked me to show him what I had written. I showed him my works and he got
two of them published. He took me to Daily Times and that was how I began publishing my works.

What did you write about then?

I just liked writing poetry that expressed the things of God. I wrote about creation and he liked it and took me to
Daily Times and introduced me to the Features Editor. Later he took me to Concord newspapers, to meet the late
Dele Giwa. He welcomed me warmly. Another nice person I met at Con- cord was Dele Omotunde. I started writing
as a student, and they were publishing my works almost every week. Omotunde really encouraged me and I
decided not to go back to Daily Times. I continued publishing my works in Concord. By the time I was up and
running with Concord, Giwa left to set up Newswatch magazine.

Dele Omotunde went with him. After I completed my train- ing at NIJ, I did freelance work for Concord for about a
year or two. About that time, Reverend (Dr) Wilson Badejo, who later became the General Overseer of Foursquare
Gospel Church introduced me to Stanley Egbochukwu, who also received me warmly. I recall that Lewis Obi used
to ask me to do interviews for him. Actually I was not a good writer then, but Obi was a fantastic teacher, editor and
motivator. My stories were regularly published in Concord. However, when I sought to be employed as a fulltime

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 5
            Dr. Paulyn Walley-Daniels Ghanaian lady who became Nigeria 's first female sports reporter

staff, I hit a brick wall because Doyin Abiola did not quite like me. I think she wasn't interested in me because I was
a foreigner. I will say that

anywhere.

Was it that she didn't think you could perform well on the job?

I don't know; she wasn't interested in me. She just didn't like me and so, she didn't en- courage me. But the Sports
Editor, an Ijaw man born in Ghana became my friend. One day he said, 'why don't you come and report sports for
me?' He asked if I knew anything about sports. I told him I had been an athlete and did well in high jump and long
jump in school. That was how I started covering sports. At that time, in 1984, there was no lady covering sports in
the whole of Nigeria. News quickly got to Doyin Abiola that there was a lady on the Concord Sports Desk. That was
how I became the first lady sports journalist in the whole of Africa.

Are you sure about that?

Yes, I am very sure. Because that was how Doyin Abiola recognized that I would make a mark for Concord and I
got to travel around the country and Africa. I remember when the Nigeria Tobacco Company NTC organized a golf
tournament in Niger State and General Babangida attended with his wife, Maryam. I interviewed them. Maryam
Babangida was so happy that a woman was covering sports and so she formed a female soccer team.

Princess Bola Jegede also set up her own female soccer club. My success encouraged NTA to appoint a female
sports correspondent. As the first female sports reporter, I was considered a trailblazer. Quality magazine, which
was under the Newswatch stable, interviewed me. Even Daily Mirror used to feature my sports column on the back-
page and that gave me a lot of exposure.

However, working at Concord was not smooth sailing though - there was an at- tempt to terminate my appointment
because of a malicious report about me. Before then I had been supplying stories to the Business Desk when
Nsikak Essien was the Business Editor. When he left, Rose Umoren took over. So when the malicious report was
made about me, she defended me and requested that I should be re-assigned to her desk.

So while I was in Business Concord, I was still reporting sports for National Concord, writing features for the
Features Desk, and also writing about the business side of sports. I was the first re- porter that started writing about
the business side of sports. I recall interviewing Segun Odegbami and reported on what companies like Coca-Cola
and Seven-Up were doing to support sports. The companies were very impressed that I was writing on the business
angle of sports.

Did they ever sponsor you to cover international com- petitions?

Yes. I was in China for the first women soccer competition. I went to Egypt and some other places. Some other
companies that sponsored me were Cadbury and Food Specialties (which is now known as Nestle), but Seven-Up
was my biggest and strongest sponsor. They were good to me.

At what point during your Concord days did you meet Mike Awoyinfa?

Because of my strong Christian back- ground I interacted with Stanley Egbo- chukwu, who was a Christian. I
desperately wanted to be employed, so I used to move from desk-to-desk, requesting to be allowed to write for the
desk. At a point I went to Weekend Concord; that was when I met to Dimgba and realized we were both Christians
and became close.

That's how I met Mike Awoyinfa. Whenever I travelled they asked me to send them interesting stories. One thing I
loved about Awoyinfa is that he preferred you telling him the story; he would look for the most interesting angle and
then write the story himself, and share the byline with me. Lewis Obi also liked me to just re- cord the whole
interview, transcribe or tell him the story, which he then wrote in his preferred style.

They both had a way of making the story project the nature of their publications, which were magazines.

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 5
           Dr. Paulyn Walley-Daniels Ghanaian lady who became Nigeria 's first female sports reporter


Load-Date: June 30, 2014


  
