

                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 2
                                        We live in dangerous times in Nigeria –Awoyinfa




                         We live in dangerous times in Nigeria –Awoyinfa
                                                           The Sun (Nigeria)
                                                        January 9, 2015 Friday




Copyright 2015 The Sun Publishing Limited Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. (Syndigate.info) All Rights Reserved




Length: 520 words
Byline: Our Reporter

Body


Former Managing Director of The Sun Publishing Limited, Mike Awoyinfa, yesterday regretted the growing
insecurity that has drenched the nation in blood and tears.

By SAM OTTI

Former Managing Director of The Sun Publishing Limited, Mike Awoyinfa, yesterday regretted the growing
insecurity that has drenched the nation in blood and tears.

He said the country needs a leader with the political will to tame vicious killings troubling the nation and reassure
citizens of safety of their lives and property.

Awoyinfa stated this in Lagos during the commemoration ceremony of Simeon Olaosebikan Apata, founder of
Apata Memorial Nursery, Primary and High School, Isolo, who was murdered by faceless hoodlums on January 8,
1995.

The ace journalist, who was the guest speaker at the event, frowned on incessant killings in the country and the
failure of the law enforcement agencies to bring the culprits to book.

"You don't know how lucky you are to be alive in this New Year. This is a very dangerous country. This is a very,
very difficult country, a country where you are on your own. This is a country where people kill others and they go
scot-free," he said.

Recalling his colleague and business partner, Dimgba Igwe, who was mowed down by a hit-and-run driver on
September 6, 2014 and the death of celebrated journalist, Dele Giwa through a letter bomb, Awoyinfa stressed

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 2
                                   We live in dangerous times in Nigeria –Awoyinfa

that the failure to bring the perpetrators of these dastardly acts to book had eroded his confidence in the Nigeria
Police.

He described September 6, 2014 as the darkest day of his life. Aside the shock of Igwe's death, he said the tragic
incident also sapped his zeal of jogging to Apata Junction in Okota, which he and the deceased routinely did
together during his lifetime.

Awoyinfa called for divine intervention to pull the nation back from the brink. He said the country needed a leader
with integrity, who could address the several challenges facing the nation.

"We pray that God will give us a leader that Nigeria deserves. I am not a politician. I am only a Nigerian and I wish
Nigeria the best. This is a very dangerous time in the country," he said.

He applauded the legacy of the late Apata, noting that his investment in the nation's education sector had yielded
immense benefits. He described the school as a good platform for learning and urged students of the school to
efficiently utilise the opportunity given to them.

Awoyinfa said the power of education elevated him to his current position, having successfully edited the defunct
Weekend Concord and later becoming the Managing Director/Editor-in-Chief of The Sun, a tabloid newspaper that
has become a national and international brand.

While welcoming parents and guests to the event, Ayodele Apata described his late father as a compassionate
man, who attended to the needs of people around him. He expressed joy that his father's legacies had continued to
flourish in the past 20 years under the care of his three wives.

Ayodele said his father left shoes too big to fill, while praising the resilience of his three wives, who had successfully
managed the school to a citadel of excellence.


Load-Date: January 9, 2015


  
