

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 2
                                                   Khashoggi's murder




                                                Khashoggi's murder
                                                   The Nation (Nigeria)
                                                 October 28, 2018 Sunday



Copyright 2018 The Nation All Rights Reserved

Length: 694 words

Body


 AS Nigerian journalists were getting ready to commemorate the 32nd anniversary of Dele Giwa's murder through a
letter bomb on October 19, news broke of the disappearance in the Saudi Consulate inTurkey of a very popular
journalist and Washington Post columnist, Jamal Khashoggi on October 2.

Khashoggi had gone to the embassy on a second invitation to obtain a document certifying that he had divorced his
ex-wife, so he could marry his Turkish fiancée, Hatice Cengiz who waited in vain for about 11 hours for him to come
out but he never did. Sadly though, the Saudi government insisted that Mr.Khashoggi left the consulate even when
there was no evidence to that effect.

The Saudi government insisted that all reports about his disappearance or death were 'completely false and
baseless'. Khashoggi was well known for his journalistic works spanning many years. He reported for various media
organisations in Saudi Arabia on the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and even on Osama Bin Laden. He was
reportedly close to the Saudi royal family and even served as an adviser to the government.

However, with no love lost between him and the royal family in recent years, he went on a self-imposed exile to the
United States last year. It is therefore very curious that his disappearance has been a product of different
incoherent versions for almost three weeks now. For about two weeks, the Saudis denied he disappeared in their
consulate. Then claimed he died during interrogation, then changed to the story of a botched abduction back to
Saudi Arabia. Just a few days ago, with mounting global outrage, the Saudi government publicly accepted that
Khashoggi had died during a botched operation to return him to Saudi Arabia.

UN investigators said that Khashoggi was a victim of 'extra-judicial execution carried out by the Saudi government.
The Saudi prosecutor on Thursday declared that the journalist's murder was a pre-meditated crime. No matter the
post-murder rhetoric, the bottom-line is that the journalist is dead and the worst is that his corpse is not available to
the family for proper burial.

Khashoggi's murder comes at a time journalists around the world are almost in despair over their safety, both in
democracies and dictatorships; in conflict zones and in peaceful environments. In the last 15 years, 1,035
professional journalists have been killed globally. A huge percentage was murdered in the course of their duties.
Some died in cross- fires during wars and conflicts like the iconic Marie Colvin, the Sunday Times award winning
war correspondence who died in Syria in 2012 alongside a French photo-journalist. About 11% died in the course
of other dangerous assignments.

                                                                                                            Page 2 of 2
                                                  Khashoggi's murder

The Committee for the Protection of Journalists (CPJ) has decried the fact that in 2017 alone, 262 journalists were
behind bars for doing their jobs, with China and Turkey imprisoning more journalists than anywhere else in the
world. Syria and Mexico remain the most deadly countries for journalists according to Reporters Without Borders
(RSF).

It is apposite to state that the verbalising of total mistrust for journalists and the political propaganda against the pen
profession have emboldened people to continually attack the media and journalist globally. This latest murder of
Khashoggi must be thoroughly investigated and proper sanctions meted to culprits.

It is encouraging that most countries like Germany and others are ready to place sanctions on the Saudi
government following the journalist's murder. Curiously though, most African governments have kept sealed lips
since the October 2 news of the journalist's disappearance and subsequent announcement of his murder.

It is a worrisome trend because journalists all over the world deserve to do their legitimate job in atmospheres of
safety and peace. Murders, assassinations, imprisonments and torture must not be meted to harmless journalists
contributing their quota to national development. Our hope is that those responsible for the murder of Jamal
Khashoggi be prosecuted in a court of competent jurisdiction and punishment appropriately meted to serve as a
deterrent to future murderers of innocent journalists.


Load-Date: October 29, 2018


  
