

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 3
                       Gaddafi's Madness And the Senate President Who Saw Tomorrow [analysis]




Gaddafi's Madness And the Senate President Who Saw Tomorrow [analysis]
                                                             Leadership (Abuja)
                                                       March 17, 2011 Thursday



Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1508 words
Byline: George Agba
Dateline: Abuja

Body


In this report,

 recalls a statement by the Senate President, David Mark that Libyan President, Col. Muammar Gaddafi was a mad
man who needed not to be taken seriously and implies that this may have been a prediction of the very madness
the African leader is unleashing on his people for asking him to relinquish power.

Commenting on the gruesome murder of a forefront Nigerian Journalist, Dele Giwa in 1986, Radical Jamaican
scholar and former Ahmadu Bello University lecturer, Dr. Patrick Wilmot once said, "Like all Journalists and social
critics, all Dele Giwa did was to hold a mirror so that the society can see its own reflection; if you don't like what you
see in the mirror, breaking the mirror will not change anything and killing him will change even less, because the
truth of a man cannot be dissolved in his own blood".

Even Dele Giwa himself as a former features editor of the old Daily Times of Nigeria on the assassination of
General Murtala Mohammed on February 13, 1976, wrote thus: "Mohammed knew that the reform agenda he was
crusading would offend the powerful and the mighty but he was determined to carry on because the Job that has to
be done must be done".

This was likely what President of the Senate, David Mark did for Africa when he described Libyan President, Col.
Muammar Gaddafi as a mad man.

In March 2010, at a plenary while Senate was discussing a motion on the bomb blast which claimed one life in the
premises of Delta State government house annex in Warri and also on sectarian crisis in some parts of the country,
Senator Ayim Ude from Ebonyi State inserted into the motion a list of prayers; among them was a prayer
condemning inflammatory comments by both internal and international personalities, including that of Gaddafi, the
Libyan President.

In his reaction, Gaddafi called for the splitting of Nigeria along religious lines- Christians and Muslims as a panacea
to the ethno religious violence claiming hundreds of thousands of lives and properties.

Presiding President of the Senate, Mark, in a swift reaction dismissed such call, saying that discussing the matter in
the hallowed chamber would have amounted to giving unnecessary publicity to "a madman".

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                   Gaddafi's Madness And the Senate President Who Saw Tomorrow [analysis]

According to Mark, "why do you want to give a mad man that level of publicity? He said the same thing about
Switzerland; he said the same thing about England and it did not work. Truly, in my candid opinion, I do not think he
needs that level of publicity."

Coincidentally, a motion moved by Deputy Senate Leader, Victor Ndoma-Egba, (SAN) on the spate of crisis and
violence was to be amended by Senator Ude, drawing the attention of the upper legislative House to the call by
Gaddafi.

Other Senators including members of the House of Representatives roundly came down heavily on Gaddafi.
Specifically, Senator Joel Danlami Ikeanya from Taraba described Gaddafi as a reckless and an incurable madman
who should restrict his advice and energy to his country, Libya.

Senator Danlami stated: "He is a reckless leader and his madness is incurable. Nigerians have lived together and
we have mixed, intermarried as Christians and Muslims and I believe we need to live together. Even in Isreal, we
still have Muslims and in some places, Arabs are there and I believe he (Gaddafi) has lost his conscience. He is not
a leader people should believe in".

Ironically, that was another opportunity the Nigeria mass media, writers and columnists had to lash on Senator
Mark. Some columnists became more catholic than the Pope. According to close political observers who were
sympathetic to Mark, they lost their sense of reasoning and became Libyans rather than Nigerians. They criticised
and indeed berated the President of the Senate for asking Nigerians to ignore the call by Gaddafi.

The thinking was that Nigerians and even those Journalists, who are expected to know better, most of the time,
allow unnecessary sentiments and emotions to becloud their sense of reasoning.

What these analysts and columnist failed to understand in this context is that Ghaddafi's initial expectation was that
Nigeria should be split into North and South. To him (Gaddafi), this remains the panacea to the incessant sectarian
violence in Nigeria.

Pundits believe that Gaddafi and his likes have long worked for Nigeria to become a failed state without success
and since this has been impossible they are gradually working towards the balkanisation of Nigeria along religious
and ethnic lines. They are fanning embers of ethnicity to win those ethnic chauvinists to support this cause. This
revelation, these pundits say, has only blown the lid off the plans of the Gaddafis. It has shown that most of the
crises in Nigeria are sponsored by very powerful individuals from within and outside.

Those living in glass houses should not throw stones. When they do, such stones should not be thrown into a
hugely populated area because the entire populace will show their angst in various forms. Some will pelt the glass
house with rotten eggs, others with tomatoes while others will go further to use expensive shit. The comment on
Nigeria by Gaddafi amounted to throwing stones into the heart of a huge population from a glass house and the
reactions have been negatively overwhelming to the helmsman of Libya.

Then Mark is the man who saw tomorrow. Now, Gaddafi is more devastating and gruesome. For someone who
says he believes, and persistently pursues the agenda of a one United Africa to then preach balkanisation of
another country, shows sheer incoherence of thought and ideology.

In the on-going crisis in Libya, Gaddafi had rolled out more than 50 armoured tanks, sophisticated ammunition and
troops against his fellow country men and women whom he swore to protect and defend. How else can a leader be
more lunatic than Gaddafi? This is perhaps why Senator Mark called him a 'madman'.

While commending him for predicting the madness Gaddafi is currently unleashing on his own people in Lybia, it is
worthy of note that the Senate President has, before now, had more than a fair share of brushes in the media since
he came into public life. As a former Communications Minister, he was roundly vilified in the media for asking
telephone owners under the then Nigeria Telecommunication (NITEL) to pay their bills. Expectedly, the media
lashed on it and reported Mark as having said that "Telephone is not for the poor". Senator Mark has made spirited

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 3
                    Gaddafi's Madness And the Senate President Who Saw Tomorrow [analysis]

attempts to explain the context in which the statement was made. He had explained that if you own a telephone
line, you must pay your bills so that the then NITEL can survive and render better services.

That singular action, many believe, resuscitated NITEL. The organisation was able to pay salaries and allowances
of its workers as at when due. It was no longer relying on government subvention to operate. Besides, Mark
introduced the digitalisation of NITEL and the difference was seen.

But then more than a few Nigerians, including the media took Mark to the cleaners as an "enemy" of the poor.

Eventually, the Global Service for mobile Telecommunication (GSM) came to Nigeria. Public commentators who
have had time to revisit the attack on Mark raised questions as to how these critics intend to Apologise to Mark. The
simple question is this; how many Nigerians today would own a line without having a prepaid or recharge card, and
how many Nigerians own a GSM telephone line free of charge?

As a Telecommunication Engineer, Mark was only being futuristic; he knew that the telephone is an asset which did
not fall from the moon as a free gift. In other climes, Mark would have been praised and even given laurels for being
a visionary that he is without sounding immodest, with the positive revolution in the Telecommunication industry.

The truth of the matter is that Senator Mark is too frank, too blunt. He does not call a spade another name other
than what it is. That is just his offence. He says it as it is; no pretences, no pontificating nor prevarication.

The Chief Press Secretary to the Senate President, Mr. Paul Mumeh, while maintaining that Mark has been
vindicated with the present happenings in Lybia said, "We should learn to decode a message instead of laying the
messenger on the slab for slaughter. The Ocherome Nannas of this world should bury their heads in shame for
betraying the trust as an ombudsman, educators, informers and social crusaders.

"They should hide themselves in shame because like the telephone issue, Mark has once again been vindicated;
the true manifestation of Gaddafi's madness is currently on display. They should in an enlightened society
apologise to Senator Mark and be more patriotic to the nation".

For Gaddafi, what goes round truly comes around. He would realise that while he was busy pointing a single finger
at others, the remaining four were indeed, pointing at him. No foreigner would truly love Nigeria more than
Nigerians themselves. The Gadfly must have understood the true meaning of the saying; "voice populi, voice dei",
meaning the voice of the people is the voice of God.


Load-Date: March 17, 2011


  
