

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 3
                                  Sustaining Political Re-Branding, Media Profiling [analysis]




                Sustaining Political Re-Branding, Media Profiling [analysis]
                                                      Daily Independent (Lagos)
                                                      October 18, 2010 Monday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1101 words
Byline: Joe Nwankwo
Dateline: Abuja

Body


Political rebranding is relatively new in Nigeria. But in advanced democracies like the United States and Britain, it is
a must and a multi-billion Dollar industry.

"Political re-branding" is a phrase that requires using some of the methods developed in commercial marketing, to
reposition a political party and politicians within a political space.

As the 2011 election looms in the horizon, the stage is set for image burnishing and fine-tuning as the case may be.
And owing to the slippery political terrain in the country with many a Nigerian politician often faced with mudslinging,
the imperativeness of a skilled and political brand manger brand becomes even more. The dearth of political brand
managers has yielded disastrous results with not a few politicians relying on unskilled relation advisors.

According to Earl Osaro Onaiwu of Red Carpet Protocol, the nation's foremost political and image branding outfit,
advances in technology has made Nigeria part of the global community with the result that whatever dust or mud is
thrown at a politician, true or false, would have dire and far reaching implications, hence the need for people like
him with vast experience in political branding.

Onaiwu remarked that political parties and politicians should be brand identities looked upon by their constituents
and electorate as people they can trust. And to achieve this, he says, goes beyond the occasional media online
stories and or interviews. For him it involves a sustained and strategic media profiling.

The brand expert laments that most politicians lack the awareness that they should be "brand personalities" and
have a history of iconic public projection.

Osaro's thinking is in sync with a recent study in the United Kingdom which states that "why re-branding" is so
interesting and significant is because it replaces the relatively stable, or at least slow-moving, character of
traditional political identity which a much more aggressively and strategically mobile version, alert to the conditions
of the "political market" and the changing profile of media relations. This version appears to give added emphasis to
"managerialist" concerns, the ability not simply to inspire but "to deliver."

Speaking recently at a public forum, Onaiwu said: "The 2011 election is sure to rake up a lot of dust and mud and it
will be a surprise if it does not. This will not be surprising owing to the lucrative nature of political office in the

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 3
                            Sustaining Political Re-Branding, Media Profiling [analysis]

country. Politicians and political actors as well as political parties will need to do more in terms of branding and
marketing themselves."

He expressed regrets that most politicians are yet to grasp the import of presenting themselves as political brands
as exemplified by David Cameron of Britain, Barack Obama of the United States and Angela Merkel of Germany.
He is of the opinion that once the Nigerian politician begins to see politics as a long-term commitment with the
people, they will cease relying on non-professionals that tend to create bigger problems for them.

He further argued that most of those canvassing for one office or the other especially for the highest office of the
land have issues they need to properly situate before the public with the help of people like him.

The Red Carpet Protocol CEO is not far from the truth. For instance, President Goodluck Jonathan has suddenly
found himself in a bomb blast quagmire with his media managers spinning tales that get them enmeshed further in
the mud.

Former military president, Ibrahim Babaginda, has a long hurdle convincing Nigerians of his annulment of the June
12 presidential poll, the suspicion of his administration in the killing of renowned journalist, Dele Giwa, and the
misappropriation of the $12billion Gulf oil windfall.

Similar baggage hangs on former vice president, Atiku Abubakar, who is facing mounting opposition from all sides
including his home state, Adamawa.

For Onaiwu, being courted by all the frontline politicians, these are matters that can be handled and presented to
the Nigerian public without ruckus especially if Nigerians are made to understand the historical imperativeness of
the era and circumstances of the issues when these things happened.

He explains that focus should be on re-branding of both party and individuals in a way that is unprecedented in
scale and styling, stressing that the Nigerian public should be made to understand that governance is bit of
populism and large dosage of eye for the future.

The brand icon, who at present drawing the cream de la cream of the political class and has been variously
described as a man of many parts is raising the bar in this election eve with his long standing experience doing
business with governors.

He has already raised the bar with his Governor's Mandate Television (GMT), on primetime with major TV networks
in the country and ready to go on satellite platform. There is but little doubt that GMT has revolutionised reportage
on development projects in states and what governors are doing for their people.

Similarly, he has launched First Ladies Television (FLT), which is dedicated to the humanitarian and pet projects of
wives of state governors and is in talks with some foreign First Ladies in the continent to showcase their gesture of
humanness.

Before his foray into the TV, he was the first person to launch two fully fledged newspapers, The Democratic
Mandate and The Congress, to showcase the activities of state governors: their projects and views. The Congress
was dedicated to reporting the legislature, their initiatives and constituency projects.

He is yet on another milestone as he is set to roll out a TV programme, Inside the Niger Delta. The programme is
designed to showcase the Niger Delta in its entirety: governments' interventions, NDDC's initiatives, oil companies'
activities, individual and communities' efforts in the hub that is home to Nigeria's vast oil resources.

Onaiwu disclosed that the programme is dear to him because he wants to tell the Niger Delta story as has never
being told, from the perspective of the people, government and those exploiting for oil and providing other ancillary
services.

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 3
                            Sustaining Political Re-Branding, Media Profiling [analysis]

Owing to these programmes of his, an informed commentator described him as the "Governors' Man." This
appellation is not misplaced when one takes into cognizance Onaiwu's long standing relationship with many a
governor.

A master of Open Hall Meetings and Meet-the-People Fora, Onaiwu, argues that most of the country's politicians
are yet to meet those they seek to serve, pointing out that 2011 election is one that requires synergy between the
politician and people.


Load-Date: October 29, 2010


  
