

                                                                                                            Page 1 of 3
                                            Chronicling Ordeal of Journalists [analysis]




                              Chronicling Ordeal of Journalists [analysis]
                                                      Daily Independent (Lagos)
                                                         May 3, 2010 Monday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1663 words
Byline: Emma Maduabuchi

Body


There is no doubt among informed Nigerians that the Nigerian journalist and his profession are currently under
siege. Within three months, two journalists have been felled by assassins' bullets, some others have had attempts
made on the lives, while are great number is labouring under threats.

There is no time like now, in the history of journalism in Nigeria, when a great many journalists had had reasons to
consider their continuous stay in the profession. Many were greatly jolted since the evening of Saturday, April 24,
the day that Edo Ugbagwu, a reporter with The Nation Newspapers, was murdered by assassins in his sitting room.

Ugbagwu, who was of the Judiciary Desk of his organisation, specifically covered the Lagos High Court, Ikeja. He
hailed from Oturkpo, Benue State. Edo, as he is fondly called, was shot at close range in the presence of his
younger brother.

Before now, journalists have had cause to lament what has come to be known as their intimidation, persecution and
brutalization by governments and their agents. But today, it is the belief of many that things have now gone from
bad to worse with added hazard of assassinations.

Since the past two years, journalists have become targets of assassins. At least, assassins' have felled three
journalists within that period. Abayomi Paul, a member of the Editorial Board of Guardian was killed in August 2008.
In September 2009, Bayo Ohu, Assistant Political Editor of Guardian Newspapers was shot dead on a Sunday
morning, while at home with his family.

Explaining to Daily Independent how it feels to be a journalist in a time like this, Anote Ajeluorou said it felt terrible.
According to him, one of the reasons it felt terrible was because the motives for the attacks were not known, while
the second was the fact that none of past perpetrators of the heinous crimes were ever apprehended.

Pained by the development, Ajeluorou, a correspondent with Guardian Newspapers, lamented a situation where all
facets of Nigerian national life had been destroyed. He stated that it does seem there is a sector of the Nigerian life
that the people boast with in the international arena. It pained him that the country could not be termed a sane
society any more.

Continuing, he called on the authorities to be up to their responsibilities, and not to abandon the people to such
wicked fate, being designed by evil ones in society. "The authorities must begin to do their duties as regards to the

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                                     Chronicling Ordeal of Journalists [analysis]

welfare and protection of journalists. We would not be doing our duties of reporting the ills of the society, while the
authorities stand by and watch us killed constantly," he said.

Iheanacho Nwosu, Group Political Editor of Champion Newspapers, lamented the pain of seeing colleagues cut
down by assassins' bullets, and explained that such has often put journalists in a situation of considering an exit
from the profession.

"We found a situation where you love a profession, but the hazards are getting so high that once often has a
thought of turning his back. But then that is not the solution, because in the end you see that what is needed is to
stand and fight, hoping that one day we will overcome it."

The fallout actually is that being under siege from all fronts, many journalists are becoming apprehensive, and
unable to write their stories. Before now, journalists wrote controversial stories without looking at their backs, but
today few journalists do afford that leisure.

As a matter of fact, that is currency of thoughts in several newsrooms that the reason is the coming 2011 elections.
The theory is that there is belief in political circles that rigging may not be easy in the coming elections and that
there is going to be greater demand for transparency. And as a result of this, politicians want to start from now to
cow the media, who are central to making revelations that would truncate many political ambitions.

This is why people like Nwosu insist that to jettison the profession now would amount to succumbing to blackmail,
and shirking in the responsibility of bringing about a better society for the coming generation.

The major pain of those who spoke to our reporter is that none of the deaths involving journalists in Nigeria have
been uncovered. Responding to this, President of the Nigeria Guild of Editors, Gbenga Adefaye, said the murder of
Ugbagwu was one too many, coming after the 'unresolved murders of Godwin Agbroko of ThisDay, Bayo Ohu of
the Guardian, Abayomi Ogundeji (also) ThisDay newspapers, and others in recent times. In his words, the list was
becoming frightening. He also said that the mounting murder of journalists was indication that the country was on
free descent into backwardness.

He also saw the death of Ugbagwu as a pointer that time has come for a review of strategy by all concerned in the
media business in order that they begin to go beyond the expression of outrage, and doing some tangible things
about it.

"We must share information and collaborate in our own peculiar ways to fish out murderers of journalists obviously
out to intimidate all of us away from the path of freedom." Adefaye, speaking further, saw it as a campaign that the
media must undertake.

Some Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs) have also reacted to the killing of Ugbagwu. For instance, Media
Ethics Organisation (MEO), a group that seek to sanitise media practice, condemned the killing, and described the
incessant killing of journalists as backward and a dent on the nation's image.

According to the group: "This ugly development does not portend any good future for our nascent democracy,
especially now that electioneering for the 2011 polls has begun...The attack on defenceless journalist will further
dent the image of Nigeria and render worthless the re-branding project."

We did not see why journalists should be targeting for gruesome death when their only instrument is the pen and
laptops."

Indeed, a great number of journalists who spoke were of the opinion that the whole murder of journalists boils down
to preparations for the coming 2011 elections, and that the intentions is to scare journalists enough to be wary of
probing deep into peoples and developments, and writing about them.

Determined to do something tangible about the development, the Lagos Chapter of Nigerian Union of Journalists
(NUJ), scheduled a rally in Lagos yesterday with the endorsement of the national body.

                                                                                                               Page 3 of 3
                                       Chronicling Ordeal of Journalists [analysis]

Speaking concerning the rally, Usman Shu'aibu, National Secretary of the body explained that it was protest that
would cover all the hazards the Nigerian journalists is being subjected to daily. He explained that such would
include the murder of two journalists in Jos, Plateau State, by a mob.

The NUJ is not letting off in its campaign. On Thursday, April 29, the Abuja Chapter petitioned the police
commissioner in the Federal Capital Territory, John Haruna, over a new threat to journalists. This threat came in the
form of a text message which reads: "Gbenga Aruleba (AIT), Yusuf Ali (The Nation), Olusola Fabiyi (Punch), Chuks
Okocha (ThisDay) all have no hiding place. U must be happy now that Prof. Maurice Iwu has been sacked due to ur
bad stories and reports. We will deal wit u soon." The text told them to remember Dele Giwa, Bayo Ohu, and Edo
Ugbagwu, and wished them good luck.

Danger for journalists dated from a long time in the past with sundry persecutions practised against journalists like
that of a certain Amakiri who was shaved with broken bottles in the 70s by soldiers.

The hazards of Journalists practice entered another phase when Dele Giwa, founder Editor-in-Chief of Newswatch
magazine was killed in a letter bomb during the regime of military president, Ibrahim Babangida.

On December 22, 2006, Godwin Agbroko, 53, head of the editorial board of the ThisDay Newspapers was shot in
his car in Lagos. He was winner of PEN/Barbara Goldsmith Prize in 1997. He was known to have edited many titles
during the military era, from 1993 to 1999, and even though he was detained at least twice, there was no previous
attempt on his life.

Because of Agbroko's, rating both at home and abroad, the Director General of United Nations Education Science
and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), Koichiro Mutsuura had to condemn his murder, stating that it was a heinous
crime and blow to private media in the country and to freedom of expression.

He added: "I trust that the authorities will spare no effort in investigating this case and in bringing the culprits to trial.
This is all the more important in a country, which like Nigeria, enjoys a vibrant and diverse media that contributes to
democracy and rule of law."

Unfortunately no such thing was done. The killers went free and all was quiet on the front of law enforcement
agents. What followed next was the murder of three other journalists in quick succession.

There was also the death of Tunde Oladepo, a senior correspondent with the Guardian newspapers. He was at his
home early morning in Ogun State when five masked men came into his house and shot him to death in front of his
wife and children. Nothing was removed from his house leading investigator and analysts to conclude that robbery
was not a motive.

The mounting hazards of what journalists go through can also be gleaned form the case of Bagauda Kalto, a
journalist with The News magazine who disappeared in 1996 in suspicious circumstances.

At a time he was accused of terrorism by the police authorities, insisting that he was the brain behind a bomb blast
at Durbar Hotel, Kaduna, in 1996.

Seeking reasons why serious attempts must be made to protect journalists, Adefaye insisted: "Every time a citizen,
particularly a journalist is murdered and the security agencies act helplessly, the faith in the ability of the Nigerian
state to protect its own is undermined. Whenever a journalist is killed, debate is muffled, free speech is trampled
on the ground and the nation dives into the cave, into a state of fear and dances away from decency and
civilisation."


Load-Date: May 5, 2010


  
