

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 2
                   NIGERIA : STIFFER SANCTIONS WILL NOT SOLVE CRISIS, SAY OBSERVERS




            NIGERIA: STIFFER SANCTIONS WILL NOT SOLVE CRISIS, SAY
                                 OBSERVERS
                                                       IPS-Inter Press Service
                                                     September 8, 1995, Friday



Copyright 1995 IPS-Inter Press Service/Global Information Network

Length: 883 words
Byline: By Julian Samboma
Dateline: LONDON, Sept. 8

Body


Two London-based Nigerian commentators have come out against increasing calls by pro-democracy
campaigners urging the international community to use comprehensive sanctions to try to bring down Nigeria's
military-backed regime.

Kayode Soyinka, publisher of Africa Today a bi-monthly political journal launched this year in London, and Cameron
Duodu, an author and veteran journalist, argue that such measures may backfire since the regime is likely to
harden its stance, rather than bow to pressure from the international community.

Their view is that the best way to achieve political change in the country is through internal pressure and quiet
diplomacy by foreign governments.

Ever since General Sani Abacha seized the reins of political power in a coup two years ago, his regime has been
under sustained international and local criticism for its appalling human rights record and its steadfast stalling of
moves to institute democratic reform.

But Soyinka and Duodu are wary of stepping up foreign involvement.

"I will tell you one thing and that is that sanctions are not the answer to the current political crisis in the country,"
says Soyinka. "This is a Nigerian problem which should be solved in the family and I believe that internal pressure
on the government will do the trick."

Duodu too argues that behind-the-scenes diplomacy by Western governments could be more effective than
sanctions threats or trade embargoes. "You have to understand that all this pressure could be self-defeating.
General Abacha cannot afford to look as if he is bowing to outside interference if he is to keep his own
military constituency."

Soyinka was a one time London correspondent of the outspoken Nigerian magazine Newswatch, whose founding
editor, Dele Giwa, was killed in the mid-1980s by a parcel bomb allegedly sent by military intelligence agents. For
his part, Duodu has been an uncompromising defender of democratic rights in Africa throughout his long literary
career.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 2
                 NIGERIA : STIFFER SANCTIONS WILL NOT SOLVE CRISIS, SAY OBSERVERS

Neither are supportive of the Abacha regime, however, Soyinka's "realistic" reading of the political situation in
Nigeria leads him to the conclusion that a major part of the problem is that the civilian political class continues to
collaborate with successive military regimes.

"Abacha by himself is not the problem," Soyinka says. "He is also a victim of these civilian politicians who make a
lot of democratic noises then turn around and become collaborators, propping up whatever military despot can
serve their ends.

"I am realistic enough to see that the civilians should share the blame. In fact, they pose a bigger problem than the
military. If civilians refused every time to serve in military governments, how long do you think they would last? Not
very long, believe me."

The publisher argues that the democratic movement will only triumph over the oppressive military regime when they
give up their "fetish" about international sanctions, and concentrate instead on getting Abacha's civilian
collaborators to ditch him.

Soyinka would also like to see more grassroots organizing against military despotism.

Perhaps not unexpectedly, this argument cuts no ice with the country's mainstream National Democratic Coalition
(NADECO), which counters that internal pressure on its own can never get the military to release its hold on the
country's political machine.

Anthony Ojolola, an opposition activist currently visiting London, says: "We have tried without much success to
solve this very serious political crisis by ourselves. We can no longer rely on that path, so we are now calling on the
British, American and German governments to support our democratic struggle by imposing economic sanctions on
the country."

It is a measure of the exasperation of the opposition that they are now actively lobbying for comprehensive
sanctions, of the sort deployed against illegal white minority rule in South Africa in the 1980s, to be imposed on their
country to force the military to relinquish power.

Nigerian activists here contend that the question now is not whether leading British Commonwealth and Western
countries will impose more serious sanctions on the country, in addition to the limited sanctions already in place, but
rather when they will do so.

Some specialists, however, believe that such optimism is misplaced.

"Firstly, it is unrealistic for the West to set a precedent which will obviously be difficult to follow," says
Gregory Kronsten, a Nigeria specialist at the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU). "Trade sanctions against Iraq are
one thing. It is quite another against a country like Nigeria which is threatening no other country."

"In fact, trade sanctions cannot succeed in a country like Nigeria, where supplies can always be brought in or taken
out over land. It is not an island you can blockade. So why impose sanctions if they won't be effective?"

These considerations hardly figure in the calculations of activists whose dream is to see Abacha banished to his
military barracks.

"We are facing reality, and the reality is that the limited sanctions which are in place against Nigeria have made
Abacha lift the political ban and promise to announce the timetable for democracy," says Ojolola, who vows to
continue selling the idea of stiffer economic sanctions as a way to rein in the repressive military regime.


Load-Date: September 12, 1995


  
