

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 1
                          NIGERIA : INTERNATIONAL JURY TO PROBE INTO MURDER CASE




         NIGERIA: INTERNATIONAL JURY TO PROBE INTO MURDER CASE
                                                       IPS-Inter Press Service
                                                   October 6, 1993, Wednesday



Copyright 1993 IPS-Inter Press Service/Global Information Network

Length: 240 words
Dateline: ABEOKUTA, NIGERIA, Oct. 6

Body


An international jury is to investigate into the death of a Nigerian journalist killed by a parcel bomb in 1986, a
leading Nigerian author announced yesterday.

Nobel laureate, Wole Soyinka, who is the chair of the Lagos-based African Democratic League said "it is time to
unravel the seven-year-old riddle" surrounding the death of Dele Giwa.

"It is also time all facts are brought out before an international jury, because facts are being deliberately mingled
with lies in some underground publications so as to make the water very murky," he said.

Soyinka, awarded the Nobel Prize for literature in 1986, said "living witnesses to the plot and murder" of Giwa are
ready to testify if immunity and security are provided them by the jury. Some of the witnesses, he said, live in exile
abroad.

"The exercise is a perfectly legitimate one. But whoever tries to block the unravelling of the brutal murder, will have
to tell the world why," he warned.

Giwa, editor-in-chief of the independent "Newswatch" magazine was killed when a parcel, believed to contain a
bomb, exploded in his hands in Lagos in October 1986.

Many Nigerians believe that the parcel was sent by the Nigerian secret police.

But the military government, led by former President Ibrahim Babangida, denied any state involvement in the
murder. But it also refused to investigate the incident.

Soyinka, 59, has yet to disclose the members of the jury who would probe into the Giwa incident.


Load-Date: October 1, 1993


  
