

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                                              A Northern Candidate Against All Odds




                                  A Northern Candidate Against All Odds
                                                             Leadership (Abuja)
                                                      October 24, 2010 Sunday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 3521 words
Byline: Edegbe Odemwingie and David Odama

Body


The hunt for a Northern consensus candidate has elicited diverse comments from various quarters. Some positive,
doubtful and others very damning. To its critics, the Northern Political Leaders Forum's search for a consensus
candidate is a wild goose chase; the president says it is a gang-up against him. But to its proponents, it is about the
last card they have to play, if the North is to wrestle the presidency from the incumbent ahead of coming PDP
primaries and indeed, 2011 general elections.

In reaction to the defiance of their position that the zoning arrangement of the Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) is
honoured, the Northern Political Leaders Forum (NPLF) set up a 17-member committee with a mandate to choose
a candidate from amongst the four PDP presidential aspirants from the Northern part of the country to challenge
Jonathan for the party's ticket.

The aspirants are General Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida, Alhaji Abubakar Atiku, General Aliyu Gusau, and
Governor Bukola Saraki of Kwara State. While the idea of a consensus candidate has received the blessing of the
campaign organizations of the four presidential aspirants, efforts to agree on who the consensus candidate should
be have so far met a brick wall as supporters of each of the four presidential aspirants say their respective aspirants
must be the anointed one.

So what formula will the 17 wise men hope to adopt in arriving at a consensus candidate? Promoter-in-chief of the
Northern consensus candidature, Alhaji Adamu Ciroma, insists all the four aspirants have agreed that the Northern
Elders Forum and three governors should nominate one of them. Whoever is proposed, will receive the support of
the others.

But observers are not as hopeful as Ciroma.

Consensus candidate achievable?

The director-general of the Ibrahim Babangida Campaign Organisation, Chief Raymond Dokpesi, says the race to
produce a consensus candidate from the North remains without a crack.

Dotun Oliyide, a Lagos based political commentator differs. He says the contestants' oversized egos, arising from
the fact that their interest in the presidency in 2011 is not necessarily motivated by national interests but personal
motives will make the job of choosing a consensus candidate among them a daunting one. "Overall, I do not see

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 6
                                        A Northern Candidate Against All Odds

this as being in the larger interest of Nigeria. This is because the leadership challenge in Nigeria is not about the
North, South, West or East. It's about Nigeria and the Nigerian people. But, inadvertently, again, because of selfish
interests, it is being put out as one region versus the other. I have huge doubt that a Northern consensus candidate
would emerge. For one, each of the contestants, particularly Babangida and Atiku, has ego much larger than the
national stadium. Secondly, they are not necessarily motivated by larger interest but personal motives." Oliyide
insists.

Opponents of the notion of consensus candidate fear that injuries are likely to be inflicted on the nation's unity. If the
candidate is rejected, as will be the case when one emerges, the North may feel aggrieved and this may lead to
instability, especially with the huge resources available to the contending consensus candidates.

A political scientist with the University of Abuja (prefers to be anonymous) says judging by the political antecedents
of the North, arriving at a consensus candidate is impossible. "It is a wild goose chase" she says. "It is not
achievable. It presupposes a politically, culturally or religiously monolithic North that anyone can order around.
There is no such North. It didn't even exist during the days when Sir Ahmadu Bello, Sardauna of Sokoto, held sway
as Premier of the Northern region. The, NEPU held its ground, as did the Middle Belt Congress.

"During the Second Republic, NPN, GNPP, PRP and NPP all had electoral fortunes in the North. Only the East
(NPP) and West (UPN) were monolithic in their voting patterns. The strength of the North, ironically, has always
been Southern minorities. So any attempt to forge a consensus candidature will fail. A plan by the Peoples'
Progressive Party (PPP) in 1983 against the NPN did not go anywhere, although one admits that the rigging on that
occasion is without rival in Nigeria's voting history. "

On the merit or lack of it in the idea, she says: "I don't see any merit in a consensus Northern candidature other
than the selfish interest of its proponents."

A gang-up

Jonathan sees it as a gang up against him. "Rightly so," says Iranmwinran Osemwekhae, a youth leader from Edo
State. "But he (Jonathan) should expect such gang-up and be able to neutralize it the way he's doing, making
friends with credible Northerners, focusing on governance and remaining committed to a clean election."

Jonathan himself says the "consensus gang-up" will fail like before. Speaking through the Director, Media and
Publicity of the Goodluck/Sambo Presidential Campaign Organisation, Sully Abu, he said it will fail because "it is not
based on any principle or programme." Abu says the idea of consensus candidacy for the position of the President
of Nigeria is not in the interest of Nigerians "who have seen that such gang-ups in the past came to nothing in spite
of the unnecessary dust raised. The consensus arrangement being pursued is based on sheer opportunism and
driven by an undemocratic and illiberal spirit. That is why they have continued to be at pains to explain that they are
at work, irrevocably committed to the success of the arrangement. They have continued feverishly with their
individual campaigns.

"The Goodluck/Sambo Presidential Campaign Organisation believes in the ballot box as the only viable means
through which Nigerians would determine who their next President would be.

"The consensus of Nigerians is that the ballot box will determine the next President of the country based on their
conviction as to who best represents their hope for fundamental change against the disastrous policies and politics
of the men of yesterday. "Nigerians are by overwhelming evidence rooting for the Goodluck/Sambo ticket. This is
what is making our opponents desperate, so desperate indeed as to contemplate a gang-up of people, who are
otherwise very strange bedfellows."

Sandra Ohimai takes it further, "President Jonathan would be wrong to see this ploy as a gang-up against him.
Rather, it is a gang-up against the Nigerian people and the Nigerian nation. Even if it was someone else who is the
president, they still would have come up with this scheming. At the worse, if the person was of Northern extraction,
their argument would have been that he or she does not come from a particular state or zone in the north. So it is
time we begin to see this for what it is; a scheming for the spoils of office."

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 6
                                       A Northern Candidate Against All Odds

Is Jonathan fair to the North?

In view of the "gentleman" agreement regularly waved by Jonathan's opponents (mostly Northern), is the president
really fair to the North by not sticking to it even when he was allegedly party to it?

Osemwekhae believes Jonathan's actions are in order. Hear him: "PDP's zoning is internal to the party. If Jonathan
didn't want to respect zoning, he would have chosen someone from the South as Vice-President. But he chose
Sambo, a Northerner. That shows he respects the federal character principle that guides appointments. That's a
nobler principle than the PDP contrivance. In any case, if the constitution gives Jonathan the right to vote and be
voted for, that is a superior authority to the PDP's "gentleman" agreement! I'm more interested in what the people of
Nigeria, through their votes, make of the situation."

Chukwuma Iroegbu, a private business executive, takes another angle at the issue. He says, "The question is
whether the North is fair to the country, and particularly the South South, for insisting on having the presidency.
How come they do not consider the fact that they have produced the president for much of Nigeria's independent
life, and are not concerned about the popular perception that they have not used this for the betterment of the
Nigerian people and nation but for the enrichment of their collaborators and children? The result is that poverty is
the lot of over 70% of Nigerians when we should be in the league of developed nations offering support and
leadership to our brother African nations and beyond. Let them not deceive us it is not a question of the North as a
people but a few questionable characters who have made a fortune out of government patronage and are hell bent
on continuing in that direction"

If by a freak of nature, the 17 "wise men" are able to arrive at a consensus candidate, it will have its own merits in
that it reduces tension and probably increases the chances that the North may make appreciable impact on the
election under PDP, even winning the presidency.

But sources say whoever emerges as the choice of the North "would be an individual without a baggage."

The former President, Babangida, and former Vice President Abubakar, may have some difficulties in scaling the
bar.

Maybe Gusau doesn't have such baggage, but he can hardly pass as a sellable presidential candidate. It means
that PDP is short of popular candidates for the presidency bid. Bukola Saraki is brandishing himself as a fresh
option, and is even touted by some as a front runner on the consensus candidates' list. But how bright are his
chances?

The Saraki "factor"

Saraki's opponents always argue that Nigerians have not forgotten how he and his father presided over the
collapsed Societe Generale Bank. A 2008 attempt by the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) to
institute a corruption suit was thwarted by the immunity Bukola Saraki enjoys as a serving governor.

Most people interviewed on Saraki's chances are simply dismissive of his pretensions. Freelance commentator on
political developments in Africa, Adukwe Idris, who seems to know the man from his roots, opens up on the Kwara
Governor: "Bukola Saraki does not seem to realize that he is putting himself in the same position that his father did
in 1997. The older Saraki saw himself as a bridge between the North and South. But he never went anywhere with
this sentiment. It turned out that he had just played the pace maker for Shagari, and, as Majority Leader in the
Senate of that era, understandably became one of the most powerful figures, alongside the likes of Adisa Akinloye,
Joseph Wayas, Uba Ahmed, Umaru Dikko, etc.

"This time, despite having served as governor, Bukola doesn't even have his father's clout. He probably would be
better sorting out issues around his father's nomination of his sister, Gbemisola as his successor in Kwara."

Saraki's claim that he should be the consensus candidate (considering his age) had also received knocks. "This
reason is puerile," says Kwara resident, Jimoh Mahmud. "Saraki is a joker in my view. I expect him to base his case
on achievements he has made governing Kwara these past 7 and a half years and not on the puerile reason that he

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                                       A Northern Candidate Against All Odds

is much younger than other contestants from the North. But I can understand why he would not make that argument
because his stay in Government House has been years of the locust for the state and he has nothing on ground to
showcase."

IBB

In Babangida's case, no one is wondering what he forgot in the presidential villa after his years as military head of
state, in view of allegations that he wasn't exactly accountable and transparent in the way he handled the public
treasury during his first tenure. One critic, with unhidden sarcasm, believes Babangida "wants to finish what he
started."

IBB has many issues with the Nigerian public, irrespective of political leaning such as the unresolved issues around
the murder of ace journalist, Dele Giwa; the execution of Vatsa on what many people saw as a result of sibling
rivalry; his ill-fated Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP); his annulment of arguably Nigeria's freest and fairest
election, among others which are still fresh in the memories of Nigerians.

Although Babangida insists he has experience and should be given four more years, people wonder why he has not
shown remorse for the alleged sins he committed against the people of this country. Asks a critic: "What impudence
to brandish failed experience as his credential before us with such arrogance."

Another critic says: "Where people expect to stake his claim on the pedestal of achievements, he is taking refuge
under zoning. Even if we were to stick with zoning, is Babangida the right person to represent the North of today?"

Atiku

On Atiku, critics are just as harsh, accusing him of personal instability. He left and denounced the PDP, but made a
controversial return. Jonas Dickson, a Benue teacher says, "Alhaji Atiku counts among his achievement his
contribution to the creation of a robust opposition to the monster PDP, culminating in the forming of Action
Congress (AC), which gave him the platform to take on Obasanja, his old boss. But he cannot account for his
achievements for all of eight years as Vice President beyond acquiring chieftaincy titles and wives across the
country. Atiku says he was locked out of the government and was more a passenger than a co-driver. Where did he
get all the resources he has used in setting up all of Yola University, radio, television, bottled water, you name it."

The deluge of embezzlement allegations hanging on Alhaji Atiku's head is indeed frightening. This makes him less
of an option as a consensus candidate. "The truth is that one can only pass off dirt in the soup as ingredients to a
blind person, but certainly not when it is a case of too much salt."

Whether or not he gets the ticket to take on Jonathan as the consensus candidate of the "North", Atiku has listed
the things he would not have. "I am not against a consensus candidate," he says. "I am fully in support of it. What I
don't like is undemocratic terminologies as 'automatic ticket', 'voting by acclamation', 'right of first refusal', and
'caucus voting'."

Gusau

For General Gusau, he has indeed come a long way in his quest for presidency. He tried to contest for the PDP's
ticket in December 2006, but was forced, like other candidates, to give way for Yar'Adua by Obasanjo. Among the
quartet Northern PDP presidential aspirants, Gusau has stayed longest in the corridors of power.

PDP Zoning: The Legal Angle

In contention is Article 7.2 (c) of the constitution of the PDP which states that: "in pursuance of the principle of
equity, justice and fairness, the party shall adhere to the policy of rotation and zoning of the party and public
elective offices and it shall be enforced by the appropriate executive committee at all levels."

Dr. Ted Iseghoni-Edward analyses the contested portion thus: "This particular provision has become the bone of
contention and the interpretation and enforceability of this provision is at the heart of the cohesion in the PDP. It

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 6
                                       A Northern Candidate Against All Odds

questions the veracity of the Northern consensus and raises questions in the mind of all Nigerians as to why a
clause such as this in a party manifesto/constitution should now determine the nation's political destiny.

"Quite simply, application of this provision to the current facts on ground, being eligibility of President Goodluck
Jonathan who hails from the South-South to run for the presidency in 2011, while the PDP zoning formula appears
to suggest that rotation must be strictly adhered to, thereby restricting eligibility to run for the presidency to
candidates from the North is what is at the crux of the matter.

"... given the fact that late President Yar'Adua was a northern candidate in compliance with the rotation and zoning
formula of the PDP after the departure of former President Olusegun Obasanjo, and given the fact that the PDP
manifesto/Constitution has no written tenure requiring that a candidate must serve for a specified time; and also
given the fact that even if there was such tenure, it will only be applicable to PDP party members and probably only
to the extent of the ability to win the office of the president, Goodluck Jonathan who meets the eligibility requirement
for the 2011 election should be allowed to contest.

"The fact that President Goodluck Jonathan had to serve out the balance tenure of late President Umar Yar'Adua
was a constitutional obligation and should not abrogate his own constitutional rights.

Politicking or Charity?

As contestants perfect underground moves to emerge as the Northern consensus candidate, strangely, the flood-
affected states have presented a 'preferred' platform for the PDP's Northern quartet for articulating why they should
be the candidate for 2011.

Babangida was recently in Sokoto to distribute relief materials to victims of massive floods that ravaged the state.
The retired general did not forget to remind his audiences of his intention to rule them again come 2011.

"I know the problem of the country and Insha Allah, I will find permanent solutions to them", he said.

Turning the occasion into a campaign opportunity, Babangida regaled his disaster-stricken audience on his plan to
give security special consideration. Other sectors like education, health and agriculture he says will remain top
priority.

Fellow aspirant and Governor of Kwara State, Dr. Bukola Saraki, who was also in Sokoto that day, donated the sum
of 10 million naira in addition to blankets and mats. Not to be outdone in utilizing the campaign opportunity, he met
with party members and intimated them on his ambition to be president in 2011.

Atiku Abubakar donated 600 bags of rice, 300 bags of maize, 3,200 blankets and 2,500 rubber mats

Gusau, presenting a cheque of and N5 million to Governor Sule Lamido, and said he was in Jigawa to sympathize
with victims of the disaster. He urged the victims to consider the disaster as their destiny.

Coming after, President Goodluck Jonathan flew into Sokoto and Kebbi States to assess the damage caused by the
flood disaster in the two states. He was also in Ogun and Lagos states which were also affected by floods. He
promised that the Federal Government would come to the aid of victims of the recent flood, but with a warning that
the incident is a natural disaster, which could not get permanent solution.

Jonathan has since approved more than $11 million in federal grants to help states ravaged by floods.

The North Will Scuttle Jonathan's Presidential Bid- CiromaMeanwhile, Ciroma, on Wednesday said the North would
use every legal and democratic means to scuttle the presidential ambition of Jonathan, who jettisoned the PDP
zoning arrangement at the expense of the North.

Speaking in an interview with the Hausa service of Voice of America (VOA), Ciroma said: "Jonathan's ambition is
dishonorable because he is pursuing it at the expense of the North, which was entitled to eight years under the
zoning agreement for power sharing between the North and the South."

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 6
                                       A Northern Candidate Against All Odds

He warned that since Jonathan and his instigator, former President Obasanjo, did not want to see reason, the North
was not leaving things to chances. He said, "Even if President Jonathan manipulates the party primaries and
eventually emerges as PDP Presidential candidate in 2011, the North would deploy other options, including a
consensus candidate to command popular support.

According to the leaders of the Northern Political Forum, the electorate would ultimately decide between a
candidate of honour and one that elevates and pursues dishonour.

Other options open to the North, warned Ciroma, were that "Jonathan could face a mass protest votes from the
electorate who may feel short-changed by the current scheme to abandon zoning."

He categorically accused former President Obasanjo of being "responsible for the current political polarisation in the
country caused by Dr. Jonathan's insistence to run at the instigation of General Obasanjo," he said, adding, "It is
unfair to deny the North the right to complete its own turn of eight years after the South did its own under President
Obasanjo."

Jonathan to Ciroma- "Don't Play God"It is Almighty God speaking through the people who will determine the future
of Nigeria and President Jonathan and not the arrogant few who seek to play God". Jonathan said in a swift
reaction to scathing attacks by Ciroma on the former's presidential comeback bid.

Jonathan on Thursday, accused Alhaji Ciroma of playing a "divisive role" in the nation's polity.

He was speaking through the Goodluck/Sambo Presidential Campaign Organisation.

A press release issued by the campaign spokesman, Mr., Sully Abu, reads, "...Ciroma has taken on a rather
divisive role. Insisting that he is speaking for the North he has been playing the politics of division and in a way
which would not edify the country's unity."

The statement added, "Indeed, every available indication is that our people are sick to death with the divisive
politics of yesterday and those who have been responsible for the country's underdevelopment and regression. No
one should delude himself that he is speaking for the North or any other part of the country for that matter unless
they are willing to go along with the people's yearning for change, fundamental change."


Load-Date: October 25, 2010


  
