

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                  Why I turned down IGP's secret invitation - Sunday Igboho




                Why I turned down IGP's secret invitation - Sunday Igboho
                                                          The Sun (Nigeria)
                                                         April 2, 2021 Friday



Copyright 2021 The Sun Publishing Limited Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 254 words
Byline: Ajiri Daniels

Body


From Oluseye Ojo, Ibadan

Popular Yoruba activist, Chief Sunday Adeyemo, fondly called Sunday Igboho, has given reasons why he turned
down secret invitation sent to him by the Inspector-General of Police, Mohammed Adamu, to the Force
Headquarters in Abuja.

The spokesperson for Igboho, Olayomi Koiki, who spoke via a video clip that has gone viral on the social media,
said the invitation from IGP was brought to his principal's residence in Ibadan on Thursday, this week, by six police
officers.

Koiki explained that the rejection of the letter was predicated on the grounds that prior experiences in the country
showed that it's dangerous to receive such letter privately. He recalled a frontline journalist, Dele Giwa, received a
letter bomb in 1986 and lost his life to it when he opened it.

He stated further that some months ago, his house was razed by some unknown arsonists and that he was
attacked by some men in uniform on his way to Lagos, few weeks ago. He added that his mother's house was also
attacked by some suspected herdsmen few weeks ago.

According to him, some men in military uniform allegedly surveying his house were also caught some days ago. But
on Thursday, some police officers stormed his house to give him a letter of invitation to Abuja.

Koiki, however, stated that Igboho would honour the invitation if the IGP makes the invitation public so that
members of the public would know whatever is going on.

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 2
                            Why I turned down IGP's secret invitation - Sunday Igboho

The post Why I turned down IGP's secret invitation - Sunday Igboho appeared first on The Sun Nigeria.


Load-Date: April 2, 2021


  
