

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                            Nigerian Nobel Prize Winner Calls for Justice in Journalist's Murder




        Nigerian Nobel Prize Winner Calls for Justice in Journalist's Murder
                                                      The Associated Press
                                           October 22, 1986, Wednesday, AM cycle



Copyright 1986 Associated Press All Rights Reserved

Section: International News
Length: 556 words
Byline: By ROBERT WELLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAGOS, Nigeria

Body


Nobel Prize-winning author Wole Soyinka has added his voice to a chorus calling for an independent investigation
into the letter-bomb murder of journalist Dele Giwa.

Soyinki called on President Maj. Gen. Ibrahim Babangida to bring to justice the killers of Giwa, saying "the euphoria
that greeted my award has turned to ashes in our mouths."The National Union of Journalists, the Newspaper
Proprietors Association, artists and university students and professors, church and labor leaders and the Nigerian
Bar Association have called for an impartial investigation. There are demands that top security officials to be
suspended while an investigation is underway to assure the public that it is impartial.

Nigerian newspapers on Wednesday quoted Soyinka as telling Babangida that the "finger of suspicion should be
allowed to point in any direction no matter how highly placed."Giwa, 39, the founder of Newswatch magazine, was
killed by a letter bomb delivered to his home Sunday. Senior officials of the State Security Service and the director
of miltary intelligence have said they questioned Giwa the week before he was killed, but they have denied any role
in his death.

Soyinka visited Babangida on Tuesday to thank him for the Commander of the Federal Republic Award he was
presented last week.

"My visit was supposed to be a courtesy visit, but it turned out to be where I could call for justice, because the
euphoria that greeted my award has turned to ashes in our mouths," he said. Soyinka was awarded the Nobel Prize
in Literature earlier this month.

"Those touched in any way by the slighest shred of suspicious circumstances, no matter how higly placed should
be kept away until investigations are completed," he said.

The Nobel laureate said he left his meeting with the president "convinced that he will keep his word to use
everything in his power to see that justice is done."However, Soyinka added, "If any of those who are even
remotely, by circumstantial events, linked to this had been civilians they would have now been under lock and
key."Soyinka said he told the president: "Evidence that now exists suggests that certain individuals are connected

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 2
                        Nigerian Nobel Prize Winner Calls for Justice in Journalist's Murder

to circumstances leading to (Giwa's) death. Such people cannot be part of the investigative process."After visiting
the president at military headquarters at Dodon Barracks, Soyinka went to the Newswatch magazine offices to sign
a condolence register.

He signed the register with the words, "We shall not rest until justice is done."Giwa was one of the most highly
regarded journalists in the country and was the chief architect and one of four founders of Newswatch, the West
African nation's first weekly news magazine. It was often on the cutting edge of Nigerian journalism, vigorously
reporting corruption.

The last issue before Giwa's death focused on a notorious criminal alleged to have begun his crime spree after
police murdered his brother and then tortured and killed his mother.

The issue also carried a report on a military officer and air commodore who commandeered a container load of
goods from a businessman, and when police reclaimed it, went to police headquarters with soldiers and forcibly
removed it.

Because of the country's economic collapse, international news magazines became unavailable and the founders
of Newswatch said they were filling the vacuum.


  
