

                                                                                                             Page 1 of 4
                                                 Florence - a Woman of Substance




                                       Florence - a Woman of Substance
                                                              This Day (Lagos)
                                                             December 04, 2015



Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 2114 words

Body


Senator Florence Ita-Giwa, former Presidential Adviser on National Assembly Matters and ex-wife of the late
founding Editor of Newswatch magazine, Dele Giwa, still looks graceful and exudes the energy of a woman half her
age. Although she would be 70 in a few months, her youthfulness, enduring beauty and elegance belie the passage
of time. She spoke to Mary Ekah about what preoccupies her these days, the secret of her ever youthful looks, and
her most challenging issue at the moment

As Chairperson of the Carnival Calabar Band Association and leader of one of the frontal bands, the Seagull, tell us
the inspiration behind the annual carnival? The Cross River Christmas Festival was initiated by the Donald Duke
administration as a month long festival of cultural and entertainment activities in the month of December, designed
to promote the state as the leading tourist destination in Nigeria and indeed Africa, with the Calabar Carnival as the
high point. Commendably the Senator Liyel Imoke administration took the Calabar Carnival to the next level. From
the enthusiasm and passion of the present governor, Professor Ben Ayade, it appears he is poised to take the
carnival to an even higher level. As a band leader and Chairman of the committee of band leaders, I and the other
band leaders fully intend to cooperate with the governor to make this year's carnival which will hold on December
28 the best ever. In fact, it will be magical mark my words.

You seem to be spending a lot of time in Calabar these days. Why? As an elder stateswoman I have a duty to rally
support and help ensure a conducive atmosphere for the Governor to perform and achieve his laudable
programmes. The political environment in the state is gradually getting peaceful again unlike in the past when
rumours and gossiping reigned. Cross Riverians deserve peace and the restoration of their dignity and confidence.

Now that you are not involved in active politics, what are you doing presently? Politics does not begin and end with
elections or political appointments; the fact that my party PDP is no longer in power at the centre does not mean I
am not politically engaged. Even if the PDP won at the centre, did not automatically mean that I would have been
given an appointment. In fact, one is not in politics for the sake of political office alone and in my opinion politics is a
good platform to impact one's society positively.

I am too busy with my charity foundation and other pressing social issues to be worrying about appointments.
Having said that, you must realise that my primary constituency is Cross River State where I have a duty to provide
political leadership for my people and in this regard I am in constant touch with the current governor of my state
who I am pleased to say is very respectful of elders and genuine leaders in the state who are interested in
supporting him to achieve his laudable goals for the state. Governor Ben Ayade is doing a good job of trying to
carrying everybody along as he tries to heal the wounds inflicted on some vital stakeholders in the state.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 4
                                          Florence - a Woman of Substance

I am urging all aggrieved parties to sheathe their swords and cooperate with him to restore unity within the state
and contribute to the development of the state. I am still playing a motherly political role in the state despite
incidences of political victimisation in the past. This is in addition to my other duties with my foundation and as the
traditional mother of the Efik Kingdom as well as being a national celebrity of note. And as a proud Efik woman I
wish to express my elation at the appointment of an Efik Lady as Head of Service of the federation.

You have affected so many lives through your foundation. Can you talk more about its activities? The Foundation
for the Children of Bakassi as the name signifies is set up primarily to promote the wellbeing of the thousands of
disadvantaged Bakassi children who through no fault of theirs have been rendered homeless and almost hopeless
by the ceding of their ancestral homeland to Cameroon. What we do is take in as many children as possible and
provide them a decent home as well as the best quality education. Today, some of the children have passed
through the best primary and secondary schools in Calabar and are in the best private universities in Nigeria and
Ghana, upon graduation in a few years they shall be proceeding to Europe and the Americas for post graduate
studies.

What is the driving force behind this gesture of yours? The driving force is simply passion. My antecedent as the
political leader of Bakassi people obliges me to put my money where my mouth is when it comes to serving my
people. I cannot fold my arms and watch my people suffer. Can you imagine a situation when for over three years
3000 Bakassi indigenes were made to languish in a refugee camp in their own country without provisions made for
food and water for them and to think that the situation persists to this day? I have had to intervene several times
with my personal resources, my consolation is that immediate relief appears to be in sight, given the compassion
and commitment exhibited by the present Governor and his recent pronouncements.

You have been a strong pillar to your people over the years. How do feel doing this as a woman when there are
men who could champion the cause? I have never subscribed to the notion that my gender precludes me from
taking charge when the need arises. It just so happened that at the time the Bakassi issue was coming to a head I
appeared to be the most prominent Bakassi indigene around so the onus of taking leadership in the crisis fell on me
and as the daughter of a famous nationalist and pioneer female journalist, I believe providence had equipped me
for the task. However, the men have been totally committed to the Bakassi cause and we have worked together to
where we are today to the glory of God. They have assisted me to fight this cause over the years and I will be failing
if I neglect to give them kudos.

Amongst the causes you have fought for your people, which has been most challenging? The causes I have fought
on behalf of my people have been many and have revolved around defending the rights of my people to decent
treatment within the framework of a united Nigeria. My most challenging issue at the moment is seeing to the proper
resettlement of my Bakassi people after the ceding of our homeland. In this regard, I am appealing to the powers
that be to expedite action on the proper resettlement of my people.

Would you say your efforts have yielded its expected results? The resettlement of the Bakassi people is non-
negotiable and will be pursued to its logical conclusion. I am however confident that the present federal
administration will not politicise the issue and once they settle down to governance I shall alongside my governor
who has exhibited total commitment to the struggle, be making a case for my people.

What is the way forward for your community and Nigeria as a whole? The way forward for Bakassi is for all
concerned to see to it that the injustice done to us with the ceding of our ancestral homeland without consulting us
is ameliorated by the proper resettling of the Bakassi people with our traditional, political and vocational institutions
intact. When this is done a signal would have gone out that Nigeria cares about the fate of Nigerians and thus
engender a greater sense of belonging for all Nigerians. That is the way forward for us all.

Tell us a bit about your career as a politician? My career as a politician has been very fulfilling in that I have
participated in four elections and won. Incidentally every election I have won has been as a candidate of what could
be termed the opposition party in my state at the time. As a politician I was Deputy Minority Leader in the Senate
and later was appointed Special Adviser to two Presidents. So I have every cause to be thankful for a successful

                                                                                                           Page 3 of 4
                                          Florence - a Woman of Substance

political career. However, that is not to say that there has been a level playing field for women in politics in Nigeria.
It is my opinion that a lot can yet be done for women to take their rightful place in politics.

What would be your assessment of the representation of women in running of the national affairs? My assessment
of the involvement of women in governance is that we were making steady progress under the PDP administration
and that if we continued; women would have had an even larger role to play in governance. As it stands now, I am
hoping that the gains we made in the past are not reversed. I am however inclined to give the current administration
the benefit of doubt in this regard for now.

The president recently was in Cross River State on a working visit, his first to any state. How do you see the visit? It
simply means that Mr. President and Governor Ayade are prepared to get on with the business of governance
without the pressure of political leanings. I was particularly pleased when he offered to commit the federal
government to supporting the Bakassi Sea Port and Cross River State super highway project.

What is your assessment of Governor Ayade and the projects the President came to commission? I believe
Governor Ayade is a visionary leader who has shown respect for leaders and elders in the state. The fact that he
brought Mr. President to the state is a commendable feat, considering the partisan differences existing. The
Bakassi Sea Port and Super Highway projects are very significant in many respects. In my opinion the twin projects
will serve as catalyst for the accelerated development of not just Cross River and the North Central zone where the
road will terminate but indeed the entire Central African region flanking Cross River State. I salute the exceptional
intellect that conceived both projects, especially the Bakassi Sea Port which will go a long way in ameliorating the
plight of my long suffering people of Bakassi, who through no fault of theirs have become refugees in their own
country.

Let's talk a bit about your growing up days. What were your childhood fantasies? I grew up in very interesting times
under very unique circumstances. My mother was a leading journalist who worked in different parts of eastern and
western Nigeria in the 50s, 60s and 70s. This exposed me to different cultures and experiences. While my mother
may have wanted me to follow in her professional footsteps I was more interested in nursing and eventually trained
as one. Did I ever contemplate being a politician or philanthropist?

May be not consciously but I often felt a pull to be an activist. It is said that a good politician is in fact a pragmatic
activist. However, my antecedents as the daughter of a traditional ruler father and activist journalist mother must
have eventually nudged me in this direction.

What has been your greatest moment in Life? I consider the lovely children that fate and the Bakassi crisis has
thrust into my care and the ability to take good care of them as my greatest achievement in life. Nothing and I mean
nothing has been more rewarding for me not even winning an election or getting a high profile appointment.

Have you had a lowest moment you felt like you have lost your bearings? As for failures or regrets, I don't
countenance them, because there is nothing that cannot be changed in time as long as one is alive. So even what I
consider my lowest point in life which was when Bakassi was ceded, I still believe that as long as I am alive the
struggle for the proper resettling of my people will be won eventually.

You seem to have a super tight schedule, how do you get time to relax and unwind? In spite of what you term my
super tight schedule, I have to find time to relax and reboot otherwise I will just burn out. Usually after my last
engagement for the day is done, I retire into my world of self pampering where I relax by listening to music or watch
movie, have my care giver give me a facial treatment or massage and generally have what I call my, "me quality
time".

What is the secret of your ever girlish looks? I don't know about "girlish" looks. I would rather say that one is aging
gracefully. As a Calabar woman I am not scared of age because we appreciate that aging is inevitable, that is why
from an early age we start preparing our bodies to age gracefully and beautifully. This is what I have done all my life
and as a mother and role model to many younger women and girls I recommend that you do not be afraid of the
prospect of aging. It is inevitable; work hard to become your own woman with independent means. Find time to look
after your body by adopting a healthy lifestyle, and always keep a smile on your face and hold on tight to your God.

                                                                Page 4 of 4
                              Florence - a Woman of Substance


Load-Date: December 4, 2015


 
