

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                                 Remembering Dele Giwa [opinion]




                                       Remembering Dele Giwa [opinion]
                                                             Leadership (Abuja)
                                                    October 13, 2010 Wednesday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1092 words
Byline: Kunle Somorin

Body


'All men's souls are immortal, but the souls of the righteous are immortal and divine' - Socrates

Numbed by the twin- explosion near Eagle Square on Independence Day, Nigerians seem to have forgotten that
the seed of dastardly bombings was sown 24 years ago. By Tuesday, it will be exactly 24 years when as Prof. Wole
Soyinka will say, the euphoria of the Nobel Prize, which he won that year, was turned into ashes in our mouths!
That day, a substantial part of the house that bore number 25 Talabi Street in Ikeja, was shattered and charred by a
bomb explosion. A television set, louvres, chairs, a table, breakfast set, which he was having with his visiting
colleague, Kayode Soyinka, and other domestic appurtenances, were blown apart and burnt. His body was
mangled and his handsomeness seemed faded for the few hours he spent at the First Foundation Hospital, Opebi,
where he eventually gave up the ghost.

That was the end for Nigeria's most celebrated journalist and investigative reporter, Sunmonu Oladele Giwa, style-
named Dele Giwa. Giwa had waded through the drudgery of being a washer-man's son at Ile-Ife. Although, he was
originally from Ugbekpe-Ukeperi in Edo State, Dele equipped himself intellectually at home and especially abroad,
made his mark at New York Times before heading home an accomplished journalist. His sartorial elegance,
cerebral capacity and ambition meant he had consigned poverty to the past. His professional sons, Dele Olojede
and Onukaba Adinoyi-Ojo, award winning journalists who are purveyors of the Dele Giwa legacy in a riveting
biography, contend that Dele Giwa was born to run.

The children of Dele Giwa's brand of journalism are everywhere. Every decent journalist would want to live, not
die like dele Giwa. The league of those journalist-writers of his school of thought keeps increasing. Those who
killed Dele Giwa could not kill his essence, his soul. He lives on. His killers must be some cowardly but powerful
elements who have 24 years on succeeded in 'covering' their tracks.

In his last days, he got ensconced in the circles of the nobles - men and women of power, some of honour and
mostly, the intelligentsia. The best trees don't last in the forest. Giwa was only 39 when the agents of hell, sneaked
in to snuff life out of the man bristling with fantastic prose and gift of investigative report. Many believe he was
above peers in preaching the message of more abundant opportunities for the down-trodden. For one man who
was at home having a late breakfast with a colleague when a postman brought a parcel addressed to him, we all
are now captive to these Armageddon apostles. The parcel was delivered to his eldest son, Billy (then 19 years old
and a student at the University of Jos). Billy handed the parcel over to his father. The latter looked the parcel over

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                                         Remembering Dele Giwa [opinion]

and commented: "this must be from the president", because it bore the insignia of the President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria.

Two men in a Peugeot car had delivered the instrument of the man's annihilation at his home. He had allegedly
received threats from state agents and had been their guest in the previous week. He was accused of gun-running
among other 'subversive' offences. As a reporter of prodigious intellect, he had engaged many issues as these
issues equally engaged the country and her people. His contacts, which should be a journalist's delight any day,
and which on a good day, would have served him in good stead, were his undoing. Three court cases and several
inquisitions after 1986 have not conclusively linked anybody fingered by his lawyer, even circumstantially, with his
murder.

What followed the delivery of the letter was a sustained agonising refrain: "they have got me!" He shouted as the
parcel bomb landed on his laps. Reeling in pains was the eclectic. Giwa died and the nation mourns, up till this day.
His dastardly murder has neither been avenged nor the mystery of it unearthed. It was the first of its kind in the
nation's history and all the accused have maintained innocence. The pervasive 'born-againism' has not pricked one
person's conscience to own up to the dastardly act.

Today, Giwa's business associates have had a chill cast 'on their journalistic odyssey'. The Newswatch they co-
founded and which peaked at 150,000 circulation figure has become a recluse of its vibrant self. Professionals who
understudied Giwa have come up with replicas of the magazine and are doing better in line of practice. Dan
Agbese, another thorough-bred founding director of Newswatch disclosed in a tribute, quarter of a century after
Giwa's death, upon reflection of the circumstances and aftermath of his demise: 'we were tempted to wallow in self-
pity...'

The enchanting prose stylist and author of Paralax Snaps made a statement in life and in death. He used journalism
for social reformation and changed the face of the reporter. It is one record that Dele Giwa and his team drummed
into the ears of the bourgeoisies that the labourer deserves his wages. They bargained for and got good
remunerations for hardwork. They became Benzy-journalists without recourse to brown-enveloping. Journalists
were never so well treated before then. He did that for the profession.

Unfortunately, the most vociferous of Giwa's backers, the delectable Lagos lawyer, the late Gani Fawehinmi, tried
in vain to ensure that a just denouncement was brought into the case, but the principle of 'collateral estopel' or
'issue preclusion' - a legal jargon which '...preclude(s) relitigation' stopped him, even after the Oputa Panel allowed
him to re-open the case when democracy returned to the country after the military years of locust.

All the evidences he gathered had been adjudged 'hearsay' by the regular courts. That is the law of the land. We
are consoled that those who thwarted efforts at getting an independent or international inquisition done are still very
much around. Some even ridiculously urged that his visitor on the fateful day, Kayode Soyinka be tried since he
came in from the United Kingdom where such lethal weapon could have been manufactured. It is all human logic
and if that will bring the perpetrators to book, why not?

The courts gave judgements and we are bound to live with them as civilised people. But the death of Giwa and the
endless list of unresolved murders and resurgence of violence are pointers to the fact that Dele Giwa was, indeed,
a historic figure. The judgement of God is immutable and not subject to arm-twisting or legalese as it obtains in our
world. We shall all get there.


Load-Date: October 14, 2010


  
