

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 3
                                          Dele Giwa's Assassination: 35 Years After (1)




                            Dele Giwa's Assassination: 35 Years After (1)
                                                    Daily Independent (Nigeria)
                                                     October 26, 2021 Tuesday



Copyright 2021 Daily Independent. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 1079 words
Byline: Ugochukwu Ejinkeonye

Body


"Death is…the absence of presence…the endless time of never coming back…a gap you can't see, and when the
wind blows through it, it makes no sound" – Tom Stopard

In the morning of Monday, October 20, 1986, I was preparing to go to work when a major item on the Anambra
Broadcasting Service (ABS) 6.30 news bulletin hit me like a hard object. Mr. Dele Giwa, the founding editor-in-chief
of 'Newswatch' magazine, had the previous day been killed and shattered by a letter bomb in his Lagos home. My
scream was so loud that my colleague barged into my room to inquire what it was that could have made me to let
out such an ear-splitting bellow.

We were three young men who had a couple of months earlier been posted from Enugu to Abakaliki to work in the
old Anambra State public service, and we had hired a flat in a newly erected two-storey building at the end of Water
Works Road, which we shared. My flat-mate, clearly, was not familiar with Giwa's name and work, and so had
wondered why his death could elicit such a reaction from me. But later that day, as he interacted with people, he
realised that Giwa's death was such big news, and by the next couple of days, he had become an expert on Giwa
and his truncated life and career. Across the country, Giwa's brutal death dominated the news not just because of
the pride of place he occupied in Nigerian journalism practice and but more because of the totally novel way his
killers had chosen to end his life.

Indeed, death is an appointment which every human being must keep. While we are on earth, we reserve the right
to reschedule or even cancel our day-to-day appointments. But in the matter of birth or death, any cancellation or
rescheduling of appointments remain the exclusive prerogative of the Creator. Although death is unavoidable, yet,
no man has any right to arrogate to himself the role of bringing forward any other person's appointment with death.
In fact, it is abominable to even use one's hands to hasten one's own appointment with death. Laws of God and
man fiercely abhor such an action. So, murderers, suicide bombers and their sponsors and supporters should get it
into their heads that they have no mandate whatsoever from the Creator of man to take even their own lives let
alone that of other people, no matter the motivation.

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 3
                                    Dele Giwa's Assassination: 35 Years After (1)

Now, deep down the heart of every man and woman, and beyond the facade of all apparent fearlessness and
bravery, lie this cold loathing and resentment for death. The survival instinct is always there and there is always this
desire and care to avoid danger, to postpone one's date with death, temporarily at least, hence the constant
struggle at many a deathbeds.

No doubt, Mr. Giwa was not expecting his own appointment with death when it came calling on Sunday, October
19, 1986. His friends say he loved life, was full of life, and wanted to make the best out of life. He had also worked
hard to excel in his chosen career – journalism. But on that Sunday morning, as he had a late breakfast in his study
in the company of Kayode Soyinka, the magazine's London Bureau Chief, a parcel was handed to him. On it was
written: "From the Commander-in-Chief" with an instruction that it must be opened only by the addressee.

"This must be from the president", Giwa was reported to have said.

But unknown to him, in that seemingly innocuous parcel, was the cold, callous agent of brutal death, intent on
accomplishing the abominable mission of hastening his appointment with death. Conceived by man, prepared by
man, sent by man and delivered by man, this lethal instrument had only one mission: to bomb out the young life of
Dele Giwa. And it did precisely that with chilling exactitude, tearing his flesh, wasting his blood, talent, usefulness to
his himself, his family, Newswatch magazine, Nigerian journalism and the Nigerian nation.

Giwa had written in 'Sunday Concord' newspaper of June 8, 1980 that "Death looks for a happy home where it can
turn happiness into grief and ensure that for days the household will have nothing to discuss but the blow of death."
He was the pioneer editor of 'Sunday Concord'. By writing this, he unwittingly wrote his own elegy.

"They got me!" That was Giwa's last words at First Foundation Hospital, Ikeja where the Chief Medical Director, late
Dr. Tosin Ajayi and his doctors had battled to see how they could save his life. Earlier, on their way to the hospital,
Giwa was saying to his wife, Funmi, in Yoruba, "Nwon ti pa mi", meaning: "They have killed me."

Now, who are these "they" that were so heartless, so senseless, so callous, so fiendish and irremediably inhuman?
How can a human being elect to do such a horrifying damage to another person? Giwa's flesh was reportedly
shattered, with some pieces (some of which were discovered many days later) scattered about in his study. The
autopsy report performed by pathologists at Lagos University Teaching Hospital (LUTH) said that Giwa suffered
from "multiple blast injuries with 25 percent burns, mutilated thighs with fractures of femoral bones and avulsion of
femoral vessels".

This is indeed horrible. The first reaction at the news of such horrendous tragedy would be to ask like Banquo in
William Shakespeare's play, 'Macbeth,' whether we, as a people, had "eaten on the insane root that takes reason
prisoner?"

Dele Giwa's death was a very slow painful death. The pictures of his shattered body which late Chief Gani
Fawehinmi displayed during the sitting of the Human Rights Violations Investigation Commission of Nigeria (also
known as Oputa Panel) set up in 1998 and headed by late Justice Chukwudifo Oputa could have passed as horror
images of the goriest type, showing man (Giwa's killer) at his basest, most bestial and fiendish worst.

"They have killed me", Giwa moaned while writhing in indescribable pain, begging Dr. Ajayi to do all within his
power to save him.

For more than three decades now Giwa's killers have been hiding, afraid of the inevitable fall-out of their satanic
deed, haunted and tormented by their dirty, murky, slimy conscience. Even if they eventually manage to escape the
judgment of man, they cannot escape the judgment of the Almighty God which is much more dreadful. As we all
know, they will surely serve their indescribable punishment forever. That will surely be the case unless they repent
of their hideous deed and make the necessary restitutions!

Ejinkeonye, a writer and Journalist, is the author of the book, "Nigeria: Why Looting May Not Stop".

                                                                              Page 3 of 3
                              Dele Giwa's Assassination: 35 Years After (1)


Load-Date: October 26, 2021


  
