

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 2
                     Imo guber: I didn't expect my application for review would be rejected - Ihedioha




     Imo guber: I didn't expect my application for review would be rejected -
                                    Ihedioha
                                                             Sunday Trust
                                                         March 8, 2020 Sunday



Copyright 2020 Media Trust Limited All Rights Reserved

Length: 669 words

Body


 A former Governor of Imo State, Emeka Ihedioha, has expressed regrets over the judgement of the Supreme
Court, which rejected his appeal for the review of the apex court's January 14 ruling that sacked him as the
governor of the state.

Speaking for the first time on the March 3 court's ruling, Ihedioha said the judgement will have a long term
implication on the country's jurisprudence.

He lauded his team of lawyers for raising the bar in legal arguments, stressing that he was amazed at 'how number
four could become number one.'

'On Tuesday, 3rd March 2020, the Supreme Court of Nigeria gave a ruling rejecting our application to set aside its
earlier judgement of 14th January 2020 on the Imo State governorship election.

'This is certainly not the outcome we wanted or we worked so hard for and I know how disappointed you must feel.

'While it is disheartening to note that your desire to introduce good governance has been halted, at least for now, it
is also gratifying that our modest efforts have not gone unnoticed.

'I therefore feel a sense of pride and gratitude for the wonderful energy and commitment that we deployed together
to secure the mandate that has now been brazenly stolen from us,' he said.

Ihedioha, who thanked all those who played one role or another in his quest for justice, especially members of the
diplomatic community for voicing their concerns for the stability of the country, commended the Chairman and
members of the Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) for their vanguard role and leadership during this period.

He added: 'In particular, my special thanks go to all Imo citizens for their uncommon support, solidarity, and
collective outrage. Never have a people been so united and committed to a cause.

'You prayed, fasted, marched, protested and even cried. You sacrificed your time, resources, and endeavour for
this just cause. On this matter, the people of Imo State collectively rose to demand for justice and fairness.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 2
                    Imo guber: I didn't expect my application for review would be rejected - Ihedioha

'Imo people rose up in defence of their right to elect leaders of their choice. Our people resoundingly rejected
oppression and power grab, defied imposition, injustice and tyranny. I salute Imo people for this display of courage
in the face of oppressive state power.

'I will forever be in the debt of Nigerians of all walks of life, across ethnic, religious and political divides, senior
citizens, journalists, civil societies, ordinary men and women of good conscience, who added their voice to
condemn the injustice done in our case.

'These are people unknown to me personally but who could not bear the illogic of turning number four to number
one on the basis of a fraudulently procured result, and appealed to the Supreme Court to save itself and our
judiciary.

'Whatever may be the personal injury I suffer as a result of the miscarriage of justice, my main concern in this whole
tragic episode is not about me. It has always been about the implications this judgement could have for the future of
our democracy and the right of the electorate to have their votes count.

'If institutions that are critical to the entrenchment of rule of law could thwart the wishes of the people in a cynical
manner, where lies the future of our democracy? That was why I sought a review of the Supreme Court judgement.

'Even though justice was not served at the end, the well articulated dissenting judgement delivered by His Lordship,
Justice Centus Nweze, has vindicated our stand. I am sure that history and posterity will be kind to him.

'To those who are rejoicing about their successful political fraud at the expense of Imo people, as well as their
collaborators, let me leave them with the immortal words of the late journalist, Dele Giwa: 'No evil deed will go
unpunished; any evil done by man to man will be redressed; if not now then certainly later; if not by man, then by
God for the victory of evil over good is temporary'.

'We believe that God will render the ultimate judgement. He has been with us through this peaceful struggle. And
our future is in His hands.'


Load-Date: March 13, 2020


  
