

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 4
                                         Journalists - An Endangered Species [analysis]




                           Journalists - An Endangered Species [analysis]
                                                             Leadership (Abuja)
                                                        July 24, 2010 Saturday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1803 words
Byline: Chika Otuchikere

Body


Nigerian journalists have at no other time more than the present come under such serious threat of extinction. To
borrow a term from the science, they have become an endangered species. The Fourth Estate of the Realm is the
organ statutorily established to not only report activities and events in society and government, but also act as a
check on both government agents and the populace in order to maintain a society of law and order.

Since the country's independence, the frequency with which journalists have either been assassinated or have met
with gruesome and sometimes inexplicable death, leaves one with the impression that some individuals or
organised groups are on a mission to wipe out the profession from the surface of the country's soil.

At the last count, no fewer than 50 Nigerian journalists have lost their lives in questionable circumstances, while
scores of others have undergone gruelling interrogation in police detention or at the hands of persons who decided
to take the law into their own hands to harass, detain, or maim journalists. The axiom 'the pen is mightier than the
sword' no longer holds true in the Nigerian environment as journalists daily continue to fall by the guns of assassins.

The word of journalism is a high risk profession which exposes its practitioners to life threatening situations; in many
parts of the world, premium is placed on the importance of the job and ensuring adequate protection for the
journalists. In Nigeria however, evidence abounds that journalists operate in a hostile environment where there is
no protection either from the government or the particular media organisation the journalist represents. It has
become commonplace for journalists to be assassinated or kidnapped without the law enforcement agents doing
any more than routine investigations.

Those who are lucky to escape the assassins' bullets are faced with imminent death from hunger due to poor
remuneration from employers. Only very few media houses are reputed for keeping a date with payment of staff
salaries. And when the salaries come, they are barely enough to transport the journalists to their offices and places
of assignment. This has in no small measure contributed to eroding the fortunes of the job. Journalists are forced to
depend on hand-outs from the same individuals and government agents they are expected to report. This definitely
affects the quality of the report expected from such journalists.

Because there are no strict rules guiding entry into the profession, it becomes easy for individuals who either have
no qualification or experience and most times are not attached to any medium, to go about parading them selves as
journalists. These individuals who have become known as fake journalists go about begging for money from

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 4
                                   Journalists - An Endangered Species [analysis]

unsuspecting public figures who, believing that they are dealing with real journalists and thinking about the poor
remuneration prevalent in the industry give them money for doing nothing.

These dubious individuals brandish identity cards of reputable media outfits which the public figures probably know
and hold in esteem. In the end, they bring the profession into disrepute. On several occasions these fake journalist
have put up unruly behaviours in public places; such behavour has led the general populace to believe that the
actions were carried out by genuine journalists.

A critical look at the activities of fake journalists would reveal an unwitting connivance of the real journalists in
promoting fake journalists. The fake journalist understands that public officers are not supposed to give money to
journalists for doing their legitimate duties. But seeing the frequency with which these public officers dip into their
pockets to give money to journalists, they cash in on it and start parading themselves as journalists in order to
collect money from the same public figures.

Were authentic journalists not compelled to depend on whatever they get from public officers for their livelihood,
fake journalists would not have sprung up in the first place.

There have been stories of how some media employers encourage their reporters to engage in what many media
watchers have come to dub 'corporate begging' by these journalists. They tell them that with the company's identity
card in their hands, they already have a meal ticket which they could use to make a fortune for themselves. The
identity card, according to such employers, is a passport to making money.

In many countries where ethics are strictly adhered to, it is ethically unacceptable for a journalist to accept even a
meal from anyone in the course of his duties. A journalist cannot receive transport fare from other sources other
than his employers. In Nigeria however, employers deliberately and impudently egg on their staff to indulge in
unethical practices through poor and irregular remunerations.

Brown envelopes, an innuendo for gratification, has become an engrained element of the journalism practice. Many
journalists would readily tell who ever cares to listen that without the brown envelope they would not be in the
profession. Everyone agrees that the brown envelope contributes to the destruction of the profession but nobody at
the moment is willing to address the malady. In Nigeria the issue of unethical practices in journalism should as a
matter of necessity be looked into alongside the problem of poor remuneration for Nigerian journalists.

Information minister, Professor Dora Akunyili, in an attempt to address the issue of poor remuneration for Nigerian
journalists recently received the report of a committee on a new welfare package for Nigerian journalists.

The committee headed by chairman of Broadcasting Organisation of Nigeria (BON), Abubakar Jijiwa, came up with
varied recommendations on how the welfare of Nigerian journalist can be improved. It is expected that the
recommendation would move to the stage of implementation which has always been the greatest challenge of
Nigerian policy makers.

The United Nations General Assembly declared World Press Freedom Day in 1993, following a recommendation
adopted at the twenty-sixth session of UNESCO's General Conference in 1991. Access to information and the
empowerment of people has been the central focus of the world Press freedom declaration. Nigeria, which is a
signatory to the declaration, has defaulted in keeping the letters and spirit of the conference. Since 1999, the
freedom of information bill has remained an abandoned project in the national assembly.

Vital information which would have served crucial purposes in assessing the government of the day has been
jealously guarded from the media. Even legislators' sessions, which ordinarily should be assessable by the press,
have been done behind closed doors.

The country is also a signatory to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the International
Convention on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights (ACHPR)
where articles 19 and article 9 respectively guarantee freedom of expression and the press. But the country has no
law to stop media censorship rather abhorrent laws that promote it.

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 4
                                  Journalists - An Endangered Species [analysis]

The country has a barrage of laws which are promulgated to frustrate the practice of journalism. Such provisions as
Official Secrets Act 1962; Newspaper (Amendment) Act 1964; The Defamatory and Offensive Publications Decree
No 44, 1966, Sections 50, 51, 59, 373 - 379 of the Criminal Code Act, LFN 1999; Obscene Publications Act 1961;
all these were carefully intended to bridle in the press.

Presently, the most fundamental issue which is not only threatening the continued existence of journalism practice
in Nigeria but posing a serious matter of concern for Nigerians, are the incessant unsolved murders of journalists.
The 1986 unsolved cold blooded murder of then editor-in-chief of Newswatch magazine, Mr. Dele Giwa, more or
less opened the floodgates for other unsolved murders of Nigerian journalists. There is evidence that since 1999,
the military boys have who exchanged their khaki for civilian garb, transmuting from dictators to 'democrats', have
become more daring and flagrant. More journalists have lost their lives since 1986 following in the trend of the
murder of Dele Giwa. The following journalists have been murdered, starting in 1996 when Baguda Kaltho of
TheNews disappeared.

 Chinedu Offoaro of The Guardian, May 1, 1996

 Tunde Oladepo of The Guardian, February 26,1998

 Okezie Amaruben of Newsservice, September 2,1998

 Bolade Fasasi National Association of Women Journalists, March 1,1999

 Fidelis Ikwuebe, freelancer, April 18,1999

 Sam Nimfa-Jan of Details, May 27,1999

 Samson Boyi of The Scope, November 5,1999

 Godwin Agboroko of ThisDay, December 22, 2006

 Paul Abayomi Ogundeji of ThisDay, August 16, 2008

 Ephraim Audu of Nasarawa State Broadcasting Service, October 16, 2008

 Bayo Ohu of The Guardian, September 20, 2009

 Nathan S. Dabak of The Light Bearer, April 24, 2010

 Sunday Gyang Bwede of The Light Bearer, April 24, 2010

 Edo Sule Ugbagwu of The Nation, April 26, 2010.

The list above is by no means a reflection of all the journalists whose lives were cut short in the course of duties.
Besides, many other journalists have suffered various forms and degrees of harassment, detention, and brutality.

The issue of the Nigerian journalist and the perils associated with practicing his profession, came to the limelight
recently following penultimate Sunday abduction of four journalists on their return from a visit to Akwa Ibom State.
For seven days, the journalists were held captive by their abductors without any government security operatives
being able to trace their whereabouts. Although kidnapping has become a major criminal activity in the country
when the journalists were kidnapped many Nigerians could not help but wonder how journalists would raise the
ransom that was demanded. The kidnappers, as if bent on making a mockery of journalists, slammed a N250million
ransom on the journalists freedom, which was later reduced to N30million after much negotiation.

Incidentally, after the journalists were released, Nigerians are still in the dark as to whether or not any ransom was
paid and if yes, by who. The incident once again presented a picture of a country in the grip of kidnappers and other
bandits. Journalists are the most apprehensive in the rising incidence of kidnapping, given their predisposition to
travel from one place to another in order to cover assignments.

                                                                                               Page 4 of 4
                               Journalists - An Endangered Species [analysis]

The government through, the Ministry of Information, has been urged to come up with a comprehensive welfare
package for journalists. This package many observers say, must include a comprehensive insurance cover which
would make provision for families of journalists in the event of death or disaster in the course of duty.


Load-Date: July 26, 2010


  
