

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                             'Why Dele Giwa's doctor left home after Newswatch editor's death'




         'Why Dele Giwa's doctor left home after Newswatch editor's death'


                                                   The Nation (Nigeria)
                                                 October 3, 2021 Sunday



Copyright 2021 The Nation All Rights Reserved




Length: 620 words

Body


 The Lagos State High Court has been told why the late Dr Tosin Ajayi of First Foundation Medical Engineering Co.
Ltd left home soon after renowned journalist, Dele Giwa died in 1986.

His widow, Mrs Oluyemisi Ajayi, said her husband did not leave home because he was fed up with his marriage to
her.

She averred that neither were the couple separated for 35 years before his death as claimed by the deceased's
lover and former Miss Nigeria, Helen Prest.

Dr Ajayi, who died on April 27, 2020, was the doctor who tried in vain to save Giwa's life after he was parcel-
bombed by suspected agents of the military junta of former military president, Gen Ibrahim Babangida.

Giwa, then editor-in-chief of Newswatch magazine, was attended to at Dr Ajayi's hospital, First Foundation Medical
Centre.

Mrs Ajayi averred that Dr Ajayi kept away from home for fear of his life in the face of possible attack by the junta,
and subsequently for business reasons.

His death has resulted in a legal battle over his estate filed at the Federal High Court in Lagos by Prest, under the
name 'Helen Prest-Ajayi.'

Prest told then vacation judge, Justice Tijjani Ringim, in an ex-parte application that in the course of Dr Ajayi's
separation, she married him and they had a child, Tosin, who lived with her until his demise.

On August 5, 2021, she obtained an order restraining Mrs Ajayi from dealing with or running the affairs of the firm
as a sole surviving director/shareholder pending the hearing and determination of the main suit.

The court also, among others, restrained in the interim, Mrs Ajayi and three other respondents from carrying out or
dealing with any assets of the company.

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 2
                         'Why Dele Giwa's doctor left home after Newswatch editor's death'

Mrs Ajayi has prayed the court to vacate that order.

In her July 23, 2021 counter-affidavit to Prest's originating motion, Mrs Ajayi said she became aware 'of an
adulterous relationship between my deceased husband, Dr Tosin Ajayi, and his adulteress, Ms Helen Prest.'

She added: 'Although my late husband had an illicit affair with the 2nd Plaintiff (Prest), my relationship with him
remained extant from the time we got married till death did us part.

'Though my late husband had decided to sleep away from home solely because of security concerns following the
circumstances of the death of the late Dele Giwa (who was cared for by my late husband at First Foundation
Hospital until his passing) in late 1986 and the phenomenal successes of our businesses in the years following that,
my deceased husband and I were still happily married (with my husband still visiting home almost daily) until the
2nd Plaintiff began the illicit love affair with him;

'Despite the meddlesomeness of the 2nd Plaintiff in my marriage to my deceased husband, my relationship with my
deceased husband was never estranged as he and I remained cordial throughout his lifetime;

'Throughout my deceased husband's lifetime, our relationship went beyond mere communications relating to the
education and welfare of our children as my deceased husband never ceased in his responsibility towards me;

'In this regard, my deceased husband regularly gave me money for my upkeep, and he would lavish me with gifts
from time to time, including buying me cars;

'Up till the time of his death, my late husband always liaised with me in my capacity as director and shareholder in
matters relating to the 1st Defendant company and all other First Foundation companies in which my late husband
and I were co-directors and co-shareholders.'

Mrs Ajayi is seeking, among others, an order that she and her children (including Prest's daughter, Tomisin Ajayi)
are the only ones entitled to share in the deceased's estate.

She is praying, among others, that the court should exclude Prest from Dr Ajayi's estate.


Load-Date: October 4, 2021


  
