

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                 Weak Laws Make Judges Give Semblance of Justice to Rotten Cases - Eyo [interview]




  Weak Laws Make Judges Give Semblance of Justice to Rotten Cases - Eyo
                              [interview]
                                                      Daily Independent (Lagos)
                                                   February 16, 2011 Wednesday



Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 4306 words
Byline: Nsikak Ekanem

Body


, a lawyer for over 24 years, is a man of many parts. His secondary school education was interrupted by the
Nigerian Civil War in 1967, after which he got his O' Level through personal effort, which he calls "patch-patch"
approach. Soon afterwards, he enrolled as one of the pioneer students of Nigerian Institute of Journalism and
bagged a Diploma in 1978.

Then he obtained his LLB from University of Calabar in 1985 and was called to the Nigerian Bar in 1986. A former
Police Superintendent, Eyo pioneered the Legal Department of the Police in Akwa Ibom State and was a member
of 1994/95 Constitutional Conference. In a chat with Special Correspondent

, Eyo highlighted what he called inherent, weak and impotent laws as responsible for Nigeria's failure to conduct
free, fair, credible and transparent elections. He also condemned unilateral declaration of public holidays by the
executive arm of government in contravention of Constitutional provisions to the contrary. Excerpts:

It is exposing how weak our democracy is. Our democracy is still very weak; that is why what is supposed to be
done by the legislature is being done by the judiciary inadvertently. What is supposed to be done by the executive is
sometimes done by the legislature inadvertently. So, there does not appear to be any clear dichotomy because of
the inherent weaknesses in our democratic process. I am describing it as inherent weakness because when you
talk about the rule of law, it is based on two basic principles: everybody is subject to the ordinary laws of the land.
The second aspect is that things must be done according to law. But when you say things are done according to
law, you find a situation where the laws based on which things are supposed to be done, are weak, their
enforcement mechanism is also weak, and the laws themselves are very, very impotent. When the laws are
impotent, what is supposed to be the duty of the judiciary in any government - not just in democracy? Judiciary's
duty is the interpretation of the laws. But if and when the laws are weak, what the judiciary would do would not
make the laws better.

Then the outcome the judiciary would get from trying to interpret and enforce weak laws would not be better than
the laws they are interpreting or enforcing. Let me give you a typical example: the last general elections in Nigeria
was fought upon the provisions of the Electoral Act 2006; one of the provisions of that Electoral Act 2006 is to the
effect that if you had contested an election, failed in that election and then decided to challenge the election which
you are supposed to have taken part in but which you failed, that law will require you first, to prove that there was

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 6
               Weak Laws Make Judges Give Semblance of Justice to Rotten Cases - Eyo [interview]

an election; after you scale that hurdle, you must now prove that the election held was not in accordance with the
Electoral Act 2006. But you and I were in this country to witness the type of election that took place in 2007. People
described it as "carry go", whereby no election was held and yet people were declared to have won the election. If
you were a contestant in that election, you would go to court or to the Election Tribunal set up for this purpose.
Remember, the very first hurdle the Electoral Act says you should scale is that there was an election.

Now what would you prove if election did not hold to open the door for you to enter and canvass your grievances, if
the election did not hold? You can well go back home and cry over your loss because you have already failed
before you got to the tribunal, not because you ought to have failed, but because of the nature of the provisions of
that law upon which you took part in the election. If you could succeed in proving that the election was held, it would
imply that you also took part in the manipulation, but some other person outsmarted you. What you now need to
prove is that the election that was held was not consistent with the Electoral Act. Then once you go there, there are
provisions in the Evidence Act - our Evidence Act is still what was put down in 1962 - there is what we call
presumption of regularity. Presumption of regularity is to the effect that if, for example, the result of a certain
election was in issue, provisions of the Evidence Act says that the moment you see a result sheet of an election
being signed and authenticated by an electoral officer, it is presumed that the result is genuine. Now, take your
mind back to a situation where I said you and I witnessed that there was no election and that figures were just
compiled and people were declared to have won.

Invariably, there was a result sheet and when you tender it at the tribunal, whose signature is that? It is the
signature of the INEC official and the stamp is that of the INEC official. Did that mean the election was held? It does
not make an election which did not hold to have held. Now from one weak provision of the law to another weak
provision of the law, what is the position of the judiciary which is now saddled with the responsibility - very big
responsibility - of interpreting and enforcing weak laws made by the legislature? Invariably, the judiciary will not
make that law better than it is because it is not the duty of the judiciary to strengthen a weak law; and at the end of
it, you see that the purported winner of the election still continues to be the winner of the election. Head or tail, he
wins, not because he has won an election, which in the first place, did not take place; not because the purported
loser does not have grievance over the election; but because of the nature of the law, he loses. So, when you find
this type of situation, you find people occupying political offices which are supposed to be confirmed by elections,
but which are not by the people's mandate. That is, the responsibility is now shifted to the court. The court is called
the last hope of the common man. I am very, very skeptical about this maxim of the court being the last hope of the
common man to sit over rot matters and then give them a semblance of justice because of the nature of the weak
laws upon which the issues are canvassed. So, instead of casting votes in elections, the whole process is corrupt
and now pushed to the judiciary and the judiciary dishes it out.

In fact, I would advise the judiciary to be proactive enough to advise those who are to conduct elections, that is,
both the legislature and the executive, who are the key political players in democracy. The judiciary should not be
made to carry this debris it is carrying because the buck appears to rest on the judiciary now. By way of advice, the
judiciary should be proactive enough to let the executive and the legislature lick their wounds and not be involved in
having to be deciding who has won an election or who has lost an election particularly in the unrealistic
circumstances we find ourselves when credible election does not hold. If the judiciary is proactive enough to sound
this type of warning, then starting from the legislators who make the laws, the legislature will see reason to make
potent laws, the executive will also see reason to go about executing the laws properly. The legislative arm of
government should be strengthened, whether local, state or national, to be occupied by people who have passed
through credible and transparent elections so that they can have the input of their constituencies in formulating any
law. Let me give you an example of one law or resolution.

I happened to have seen the Road Safety people at one time or another trying to run after people who do not wear
crash helmets while riding motorcycles. I think there is a resolution to that effect. I also think there do not appear to
be laws which regulate this or even if there is a law, then the enforcement mechanism is rather weak. Take the
case of Akwa Ibom, for instance; at a certain time, they said they banned the use of motorcycles within Uyo, the
State capital, from 6pm to 6am. The resolution (or law) died a few days after it was made. I have not seen one
person being prosecuted at the Magistrate Court, or any court at all, for flouting this order of the government. Yet,
the order is in force; it is flouted with impunity. Again, just recently, the Akwa Ibom State House of Assembly came

                                                                                                             Page 3 of 6
               Weak Laws Make Judges Give Semblance of Justice to Rotten Cases - Eyo [interview]

up with a resolution which gave commercial motorcyclists one week to fold up and stop the use of commercial
motorcycles in Uyo. Within the period of the expiration of the resolution, the executive under the leadership of the
state governor, intervened, convened the commercial motorcyclists and told them that he has interceded for them
and that he would give them one more week to fold up. The governor also promised to provide buses, taxis,
tricycles and so on, to make up for the inadequacies and lapses. Then he gave them one week. Weeks after that
intervention by the executive, motorcyclists are having a field day.

What was manifest from the intervention of the government is that the government discovered that it ought to have
done something, maybe by way of injecting some vehicles to take care of the hardship that would be occasioned
both to the commercial motorcyclists and commuters. I am asking: why did the government not foresee it before the
State House of Assembly came up with the resolution? Why did it now appear to be that the executive and the
legislature are working on parallel lines? And why is it that even the intervention of the governor, who gave the
motorcyclists one week, cannot be enforced? I am laying this foundation to say that our laws, our orders, our
resolutions, are as weak as the process that put the people in position of authority. With the way the people come to
the position of authority, do you expect something better? Of course not! That is why the judiciary is now made the
whipping boy, is now the last hope of "the common winner," the last hope of "the purported winner." The judiciary
should be proactive enough to point out the debris that is shifted to them in the name of laws to interpret and
enforce.

The lesson to be learnt is very simple. If you look at the elections held in USA, which is practising a presidential
system of government like Nigeria, if you look at the mid-term elections that took place in Britain, at the end of the
elections, the winners were known, the losers congratulated the winners because the process was transparent and
credible. If the process is credible, there is no need to go to the election tribunal. Election tribunal is a waste of time,
because what the election tribunal is going to interpret is the weak laws, as weak and bad as no law at all. So the
lesson to be learnt is that when we learn to have people put into political offices by election, we should take steps to
conduct elections which are transparent enough, credible enough so that even the loser will see the point he lost
and have no reason to complain. If that happens, he would not burden the judiciary with having to interpret who won
or who lost because when the election is shrouded in secrecy, I don't mean the secret ballot, there is manipulation
in the course of it. We have come of age to do our thing in a democracy transparently enough to be accepted by the
universal community because the world is becoming a global village. Let us not isolate ourselves.

There is nothing like Nigerian democracy. Let us accept it that we are still experimenting with democracy; we are
still crawling, but for how long? The only way out is transparent, credible and acceptable election from which clear
losers and winners emerge. I would give you an example of how it starts: If you watch the PDP nomination of
Obasanjo in 2003, the process of nomination made all ministers delegates; wives of ministers, cooks,
ambassadors, whoever held political offices who were appointed by the incumbent President were all delegates
who chose from among the many aspirants. Correspondingly, people like Dr (Alex) Ekwueme and others who were
also interested could not muster these numbers of delegates and so, there is no way they could have defeated
Obasanjo in that primary. So, the rigging and the corruption started from that level and then went on and on. So
within the party, the national level and at all levels, we should embark on our democratisation transparently if we do
not want to be misunderstood by those who may lose.

The legal profession has contributed immensely. But the legal profession is not operating in a vacuum; the legal
profession is affected by all the ills inherent in the society. We talk in terms of corruption; there are certain situations
where a lawyer goes to file something in court and outside the statutory fees, he may be faced with a situation that
if he does not see this bailiff and a certain officer "properly," that matter would not move beyond the point it is. As
far as I am concerned, such consideration is corrupt. But the legal practitioner who does not operate in a vacuum
would have to dance according to the music, otherwise he would not survive. So, our problem is the inherent
corruption in the whole system. But by and large, aside this corruption, I have seen a good number of legal
practitioners who are crusaders, who are very brave, who are very courageous and who call a spade a spade.

But most times, you see these legal practitioners who try to challenge a situation, but before they get too far, they
could be confronted by this issue of weak laws that I earlier talked about. Maybe as circumstances were, a State
Independent Electoral Commission (SIEC) set up by the provisions of the Constitution, was wrongfully dissolved

                                                                                                           Page 4 of 6
               Weak Laws Make Judges Give Semblance of Justice to Rotten Cases - Eyo [interview]

before the end of their tenure and some political parties decided to challenge such wrongful dissolution of the SIEC.
For instance, the Constitution says the commission should last for five years. After those five years or within the
period, you can remove and replace whoever is found to be incapable for whatever reason. But not total dissolution
and then the political party went to court to challenge it. By the nature of our laws, they were confronted by the fact
that they do not have the locus standi to challenge such action. The nature of our laws has been a hindrance to the
legal profession contributing to the development that it could have done. The legal profession has a limit beyond
which it can't go; as I said, it is not operating in a vacuum. It is operating within the laws made; and laws are not
made by legal practitioners.

Law-making is the exclusive preserve and business of the legislative houses - whether of local, states or Federal
legislature for Nigeria as a whole. And so, lawyers' functioning and effectiveness are limited to the laws which they
have got to take to court and with which they have to canvass their matters in court. I have pointed out the
weaknesses of our Evidence laws; I have pointed out the weaknesses of our Electoral laws - there are many others
like that. So by calibre, by the nature of legal practitioners that we have, we could have done better if the laws were
better than they are.

In contemporary times, let me not go too far back, at least I have seen the late Rotimi Williams' practice. Up to a
point, the late Chief was going to the Supreme Court in armchair. He would be sitting down to address their
Lordships at the Supreme Court. I have also seen and benefited from the services of the late Gani Fawehinmi when
I had a problem while I was a Student Union President in the University of Calabar; because I led the students to
agitate for their right, the university authorities purportedly dissolved the students' union executives. I went to court
to challenge it, that it was wrong. Gani Fawehinmi attended a Law Students' function at University of Calabar and I
whispered to him that I had a problem. He gladly came to our rescue; at least, he appeared for us in that matter
when we challenged the university for dissolving the SUG executive. I am singling this out because I was a
beneficiary: Gani Fawehinmi was a crusader. He went into areas which did not even concern or involve him, like the
one I am talking about; how did it concern him? It did not. But because he saw the injustice and saw himself as an
apostle of redress for such injustice, he selflessly decided to come to our rescue. He did that in many cases.

The late Gani Fawehinmi tried to even prosecute those people whom he (alleged) killed the late Dele Giwa. He
tried to investigate the killing. Beyond that, he said the people are not hidden and he wanted to prosecute them. But
of course he could not prosecute them because of the nature of our laws. I can go on and on to say what has been
the impediment of brave and courageous lawyers who could have lifted this country beyond where it is, but they are
incapacitated. Femi Falana is trying to get one thing or the other done rightly which were wrongly done. I remember
Dr. Olu Onagoruwa. I got inspired by Onagoruwa to become a lawyer because of the incisive lectures he used to
give us when I was a student of Nigeria Institute of Journalism. He used to teach us Press Laws and I made up my
mind that after I had become a journalist, I would also become a lawyer. Those are very, very viable contributors.
At a time, the (Nigerian Government) even said, "Dr. Onagoruwa, you are very vocal and versatile, come and be
our Attorney General!" But somewhere along the line, I don't know how that worked out for him.

He did not stay long as Attorney General. But that is beside the point; I am trying to say that we have outstanding
legal practitioners. But we have a problem: in that the socio-economic circumstances of any given place, such as
Akwa Ibom, has not made us appreciate the industry and intelligence of the lawyers practising in our state. If you
think of the intelligent quotient of lawyers, we have lawyers of Akwa Ibom origin who are Senior Advocates of
Nigeria but who are practising outside Akwa Ibom. And yet, we also have people from other places doing very well
in Akwa Ibom, but it is extremely difficult for them to emerge and become Senior Advocates of Nigeria. So the
reason is the socio-economic circumstances in Akwa Ibom.

Yes! Yes! One of the loopholes I have seen in the judiciary's functioning is delayed determination of matters. A
good number of times, a matter is adjourned because either a lawyer on the other side had sent in a letter to
request for an adjournment or another lawyer had not prepared. Most pertinently, you go to court on days you
expect the court to sit; but most unfortunately, the court is not sitting. Like the other day, I had a matter in Eket and
the matter was regularly adjourned to a particular date. Meanwhile, I did not adjourn the matter alone - it involved
me and the court officials, including the judge. In helping to fix that case on a particular date, I did not know that the
court would not sit on that date.

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 6
               Weak Laws Make Judges Give Semblance of Justice to Rotten Cases - Eyo [interview]

So, you could appreciate lawyers or litigants going to the court to see that the court is not sitting! What I am
advocating is that we should do well to lessen the number of days on which courts do not sit for one reason or the
other, because it delays justice. Or, I would advocate a situation at the beginning of each legal year, if the courts
are to be involved in one thing or the other, those issues should be foreseeable so that one can know which days
would be public holidays like Christmas Day, New Year Day. If each jurisdiction lists out the days that the court
would not sit because this-and-that thing would happen, then issues of determination of cases in court should not
be hung on uncertainties. One should be sure that a particular case is coming up on a certain date and it should be
certain that on that day, the court would hear the matter. It is embarrassing that you go to court on a day fixed for
your matter and the court does not sit. It is very, very embarrassing! We should lessen such number of days for
whatever reason.

We should be able to frame up a judiciary calendar so that you do not make the mistake of fixing your case on the
dates which courts will ordinarily not sit. I am also looking at a situation where some states go out of their way to
declare work-free days! The issues of public holidays are supposed to be certain in a developing economy such as
Nigeria. Public holidays are on the Exclusive Legislative List: item Number 51 on the Exclusive Legislative List. If
public holidays are to be declared, it should be done by the National Assembly and there should be good reason to
declare public holidays. Public holidays should not just come up by the whims and caprices of whoever is in power
at any stage, whether it is at the national, state or local levels. That has ceased to be government by the rule of law
- a unilateral declaration of work-free day and grounding of all socio-economic processes without passing proper
legislative process. It is wrong in a democracy! It can be tolerable in a dictatorial government such as a military
regime, but it is very inconsistent with the rights of individuals in a democracy.

I can't say whether you are talking about the judiciary or the legal profession and how much it has contributed to the
development of Nigeria. But it still goes back to the nature of our laws - the impotent nature of our laws. Take, for
example, the provisions of Chapter 2 of the Constitution which has to do with Economic, Cultural and Social Rights.
They say the state has the obligation to give you education, house, job... and yet when the state fails to meet these
obligations which it has imposed on itself by the provisions of the Constitution, if you go to court, you would be told
that such rights are non-justiciable. Then of what essence, therefore, are these rights enshrined in the Constitution
if they are non-justiciable? We should be able to raise such rights to Chapter 4, where the rights can be made
justiciable. So that when the state imposes it on itself that it would offer jobs and yet you do not have a job, you can
go to court to challenge it by saying, "I have these qualifications and experience and the state has not met its
obligations in giving me jobs." So the roles of the legal profession, the role of the court are all hindered by these
weak provisions of our laws.

For the Akwa Ibom State Government to declare free and compulsory education, the government is doing the
obvious. The state government has moved one step forward by making such educational right - which are in
Chapter 2 of the Constitution but are not justiciable - move to the level of justiciability. But then, the enforcement
aspect remains. You talk of compulsory education. Yet, I have not seen one person being prosecuted in spite of the
fact that we still see our children on the streets: which is to say, the enforcement mechanism is weak and, for that
reason, that aspect of compulsoriness is not there. Again, because of the inherent nature of our freedom, which is
consistent with democracy, not minding how free education may be, you still see private schools increasing in
number everyday. Even the numbers of students are dwindling in public schools because the private schools are
still preferred. I don't know why? If the government wants to make the free and compulsory education policy or law
effective, it should be concerned with the enforcement aspect. Otherwise, the government can declare free
education consistent with the provisions of the Constitution but then, forget about the compulsory aspect because
the government certainly is not enforcing it and cannot enforce the compulsoriness of people going to school.

Yes, a good number of times! You have heard of people who stayed in prisons or police cells, their fundamental
rights having been breached and they are told that the court will not sit... and it prolongs the detention, the agony or
grievances of that individual? Again, this issue has extended to such an extent that there is a case which has
become a scandal to me! A relation of mine was arrested by the Federal Road Safety Commission for allegedly
flouting traffic rules. His vehicle, which happens to be the only means of his livelihood, was taken away from him
since April, last year. The only way to challenge the matter was to go to court. After I wrote to the Federal Road
Safety Corps (FRSC) to release the bus, I went to court.

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 6
              Weak Laws Make Judges Give Semblance of Justice to Rotten Cases - Eyo [interview]

As they say, the court is the last hope of the common man. I had thought in that respect that between the dispute
involving the Road Safety and my relation, the court is going to intervene. We filed our papers and FRSC also
reacted by accepting that they impounded the vehicle and gave reasons why they impounded it. So, the court wants
to give a decision by way of judgment. The judgment was fixed to be heard on August 3, last year. We went to court
with the owner of the vehicle, but the court did not sit. The Registrar of the court would not give me a date because
it is the exclusive prerogative of the court to fix the date. The date for the judgment has not been fixed and judgment
is not delivered. About three months later, I wrote that the case should be listed for judgment to be delivered, but
there was no reply. I went to the extent that I had to write a reminder.

Now, the scandalous aspect is that this relation of mine is going around saying that I am incapable of handling this
matter and that if he knew, he could have "settled" this matter with the FRSC without having to go to court. He is
regretting going to court; and the scandal is on me, mistakenly! I cannot blame him because a good number of
litigants cannot see the difference between the role of the lawyer and the judge. They think that the two work hand-
in-hand. So that is an incident which I am very embarrassed about because of the scandal going about that I am not
an effective lawyer; otherwise, such matter could not have lasted for that long in court!


Load-Date: February 18, 2011


  
