

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 3
                                         Babangida And the Bypass to Nowhere [column]




                         Babangida And the Bypass to Nowhere [column]
                                                             This Day (Lagos)
                                                      September 3, 2010 Friday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1622 words
Dateline: Lagos

Body


On this page last week, Chidi Amuta, a man more difficult to ignore than to agree with, wrote a tribute to former
military President, Ibrahim Babangida, his friend and benefactor. But Amuta's piece titled, "Babangida and the
Western bypass," was more than a tribute.

It was part chastisement and part plea to the conscience of the Yoruba nation, which, according to Amuta, still
bears Babangida a deadly grudge in spite of all that he did for Yoruba sons and daughters when he was military
president and even after he left office.

The piece was also supposed to redeem the memory of those now in their late 20s or early 30s from the havoc and
savagery of the prejudiced lot who, in Amuta's view, are determined to revise the history of the Babangida era. I am
part of the prejudiced lot, but I have no apologies.

Why? Because my prejudice is neither personal nor blighted by my association with the so-called western bypass
for many years. It is not based on fiction either or a meanness to deny Babangida credit for the good things he did
which Amuta could not even fully list.

My prejudice is based on what I saw and experienced as an adult during Babangida's eight-year rule.

If I had any doubts that Babangida is unworthy of public office his conduct after he was forced to leave office 17
years ago has since erased such doubts. Sure, after the harsh spell that the country had been through under the
Buhari/Idiagbon rule, Babangida seized power a different man. He would have been a fool to play Rehoboam, the
Israelite king who took the advice of his friends and flogged his people with scorpions when he needed to soothe
their pains.

Babangida wormed his way into our hearts, posing like our own Abdel Nasser the soldier's soldier who restored his
country's pride and became a strong voice for pan-Arab nationalism. But Babangida, being Babangida, brought his
own ambition game to a cropper. Now, he wants to be our De Gaulle or Churchill?

Yes, he pressed some of the best and brightest in the Yoruba nation to service. But except for the purpose of
creating a comfort zone out of Babangidanistan, I do not see the point in dragging Wole Soyinka, Bolaji Akinyemi,
Michael Omolayole, Ojetunde Aboyade, Olikoye Ransome-Kuti, Tai Solarin or any of the others mentioned into a
debate about Babangida's credentials. These people loved their country and were happy to do their bit to bring it

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 3
                                   Babangida And the Bypass to Nowhere [column]

out of the difficult situation it was in at the time. I think it's unfair to their legacy and memory to suggest, as Amuta
did, that they were recruited to appease some ethnic god who they, their nationality, and the nation are now obliged
to repay.

There were other non-Yoruba professionals like Tony Momoh, Sam Oyovbaire, Jerry Gana, Tam David-West, Omo
Omoruyi and Abubakar Umar Dangiwa, who stepped up to the plate believing it was a call to give their country a
future and a hope. Except if they had good reason beforehand to suspect that Babangida's rule would turn out to be
the disaster that it was or stayed on after the fact, it serves no more useful purpose reminding us that Soyinka
served under Babangida than it does saying that Sani Abacha appointed Pius Okigbo to chair the panel on the
Central Bank accounts in 1994.

Oh no, I am not so mean, or jaundiced, as to forget a few of Babangida's good works. The liberalisation of
broadcast media licences, the tinkering with the structure of the capital market, the directorate for roads and
infrastructure, and of course, the technical aid corps, which was a lifeline to a few African countries. But who, in
Babangida's shoes, given so much, would have done less? Apart from Olusegun Obasanjo in his second coming as
civilian president in 1999, there is arguably no other Nigerian leader in recent times who enjoyed so much drumbeat
of goodwill at the inception of his rule and yet, as my people would say, ended his dance with the left hand.

How can one explain, for example, that the same man who opened up the media space, was the one who shut
down Punch, hunted the press, and assailed academic freedom the highpoint of which was exemplified by his
abduction and deportation of Patrick Wilmot in 1988 for "teaching what he was not paid to teach?" Wasn't the
Liberian crisis also, for good measure, a gravy train on the watch of the man who enthusiastically supported the
technical aid corps?

His main economic programme, the Structural Adjustment Programme, has been praised as a masterstroke ahead
of its time. Maybe it was. But like too much of every good thing the consequences are in evidence, even today.
Take the power sector, for example. Babangida did not bring power supply to ruin, but his half-hearted attempt to
save it left behind a greater mess. In 1988, he put in place a 25-year power plan to redeem decaying infrastructure
and narrow the supply-demand gap. The plan had barely taken off when he introduced SAP which left the prices of
everything from the price of staple food to the unit price of electricity (which was 6 kobo in 1979) in a tailspin.

Babangida's government, incapable of telling the truth about anything, was neither able to pursue the power plan
nor to tell consumers that the economic crisis created by SAP had inevitably widened the gap between the capacity
charge for electricity (which covers the replacement cost of infrastructure) and the energy charge (which covers the
operational costs). Simply put, government was picking up the subsidy while consumers who had grown by the
millions were hardly paying the real cost per wattage consumed. To date, we are still in the quagmire.

In contrast to his predecessor, his personal touch was fairy tale stuff. His charming smiles often made me smile
when I saw his face in the newspapers or watched him on TV. But that was before the parcel bomb that killed Dele
Giwa at breakfast on October 19, 1986.

Dele Giwa had been my idol, my role model - one of the main reasons, apart from Ray Ekpu, Yakubu Mohammed
and Dan Agbese, why I wanted to become a journalist. Babangida has said he had nothing to do with the murder
of Dele Giwa and has made it plain that he does not wish to answer any more questions on the matter. That is just
as well. But the untidy manner in which his regime handled investigations into the murder, frustrating independent
enquiry and fending off leads whenever they pointed up the military hierarchy, would cast a very long shadow on his
past and his future ambition.

Neither the passage of time nor the force of a thousand brilliant pieces by Amuta can dim the memory of that day
when as an undergraduate I filed past the shattered remains of Dele Giwa in front of Newswatch Oregun office to
say a final goodbye to the man who had inspired me.

And how can I forget Major Remi Okeowo, my friend and classmate at the University of Lagos who died in the
Hercules C130 air crash in 1992 that claimed the lives of a generation of some of Nigeria's best and brightest
military officers? Don't get me wrong. I'm not blaming Babangida for the crash, even though it happened under his

                                                                                                          Page 3 of 3
                                   Babangida And the Bypass to Nowhere [column]

nose. However, the sheer levity and incompetence of the rescue, not to mention the shrouded nature of the fatal
trip, never ceases to amaze me; it sticks in the nails and just won't go away.

But why should that be? Amuta said Babangida loved his friends - and went out of his way to please even his
enemies. Okay maybe he was a nice guy but I don't think Mamman Vatsa's family - or a number of people who
believe in fair play - will be sending him roses as he formally announces his intention to seek the PDP ticket in a few
days, never mind that Amuta's piece made it look like the race for the party's ticket is Babangida's to lose.

Vatsa and others were charged with complicity in a failed coup to remove Babangida in 1986. The evidence against
Vasta, was to say the least, dubious. Appeals were mounted to resolve the doubt in his favour and save him from
execution. To stave off the pressure, however, Babangida's government announced, with "deep regret," that Vasta
had been executed "one hour ago," when, in fact, he had not been executed at the time. Of course, Vatsa was later
executed and those who did it have since washed their hands, but not their hearts.

Was the agape love reserved for M.K.O Abiola then? That's what Amuta seems to suggest - that Babangida loved
Abiola more than the millions of voters who voted for him as their president in the freest and fairest election yet on
June 12, 1993. It's the kind of love that pushes a friend over the cliff and returns home to drown itself in tears; Saul-
lish love that puts sacrifice over obedience. Or else what was the point in bending over backwards to please the
Yoruba nation, when what was required of him was to simply do the right thing by handing over to the winner of the
election?

If the past is past, bringing closure, it now seems, to an era of "rule by settlement,"; debate about how the Gulf War
oil windfall was spent; Babangida's refusal on a technical point to appear before the Oputa Panel that investigated
human rights abuses; and the damaging legacy of First Ladyship after Better Life among other things, in vain have I
tried to search for what Babangida brings to the future.

At 69, he reportedly said in an interview that he is motivated to run for the presidency because he had seen signs
that the younger generation is incapable of running the nation.

Trust me, it's not about age, IBB; it's about knowing when to say, enough. Unfortunately with the stats made to look
just the way he would like it - as if he is only inches away from the prize - nothing else matters now. Amuta may not
agree, but the only bypass that Babangida needs, is the one that takes him back to his Hill Top Mansion in Minna -
and keeps him there.


Load-Date: September 7, 2010


  
