

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 3
                                                      A Life in Justice [analysis]




                                              A Life in Justice [analysis]
                                                             This Day (Lagos)
                                                              May 10, 2014



Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 2107 words
Byline: Adedayo Adejobi

Body


In a season of many deaths, the sad news of Justice Chukwudifu Oputa, no doubt comes as rude shock. The life
and times of a man who was appointed to investigate abuses during 15 years of military rule, which ended when
President Obasanjo took office as elected president on 29 May.

The Oputa panel no doubt put Nigeria's ex-military rulers under fire, as it took a stronger stand against former
military rulers. The Human Rights Violations Investigations Commission was one of the greatest show on earth, as
it came to terms with the past of ex-military rulers, looking at the most shameful episodes in the country's history
and making the main protagonists accountable for their actions. TheHuman Rights Violations Investigation
Commissionset up by the Obasanjo administration in year 2000 was chaired by Justice Oputa and it examined
human rights abuses when President Obasanjo was in power previously as a military ruler from 1976 to 1979. The
body constituted Chief Chukwudifa Oputa (a Court Justice) as the head, Reverend Father Matthew Kukah as
secretary, Mrs Elizabeth Pam, Dr Mudiaga Odje, Barrister Bala Ngilari, Mrs Modupe Areola and Alhaji Adamu Lawal
Bamalli as members. Dark memories of the Nigerian civil war echoed at the Justice Chukwudifu Oputa panel, as
Ohanaeze Ndigbo and the Arewa Consultative Forum engaged each other in a fierce dispute over the cause of the
war. Ohanaeze's presentation, as articulated by UcheChukwumerije, a former Information Minister hinged on the
premise that the North, working in concert with some other parts of the country, embarked on a deliberate
programme to marginalise and exterminate the Igbo. Chronicling timelines of the Oputa Panel sittings, the Oputa
Panel began sitting officially took off proceedings October 23rd, 2000, seeing Major Hamza Al-Mustapha testify on
November 27th 2000. Between the 8th December, 2000 and Aptil 18th 2011, Babangida and some former military
intelligence chiefs were favoured in a high court ruling not to appear before the Panel on personal security grounds,
while Ogoni people appeared before the Panel in Port Harcourt and the Enugu sitting of the Panel received
testimonies and petitions, withOhanaeze testifying. Unexpected especially being the principal who constituted the
committee, President Olusegun Obasanjo was summoned and he appeared before Panel to give evidence, with
Arewa Consultative Forum testified before Panel in Abuja where star witness, Major General Ibrahim Haruna was
cross-examined. October 18th 2001 marked the last day of the sitting Panel, seeing Ibrahim Babangida getting a
favourable judgment from the Court of Appeal, on the premise that the Oputa Panel cannot summon Babangida to
defend himself and his security chiefs on the murder of Late Dele Giwa.

After the panel submitted 60 boxes of a six volume interim Report to President Olusegun Obasanjo on the 28th May
2002, Babangida in ajointly filed with the former Director of Military Intelligence, Col. HaliluAkilu and Brigadier
General KunleTogun, asking it to stop the former President, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, from implementing the

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 3
                                              A Life in Justice [analysis]

report of the Oputa-led Human Rights Violations Investigation Commission. Till date, as far as shocking and useful
the revelations in the Oputa Panel were, the reports are yet to be published and those indicted are yet to be
punished accordingly - what a country! The Oputa Panel can be likened to the tale of a neglected supposed remedy
for Injustices. Going down memory lane as a burdened journalist at the defunct ' The Comet', I can never forget
when the General Officer Commanding (GOC) Two Division of the Army during the Nigerian-Biafran War, Major
General Ibrahim Haruna (Rtd) was called upon to testify for the second day running of the Arewa Consultative
Forum (ACF) at the Oputa Panel for his alleged dastardly role in the war on 8th October, 2001, he declared that he
had no regrets for the Asaba massacre in which over 500 Igbo men (civilians) were killed by his troops. He also
revealed that Nigeria's late Prime Minister, AlhajiAbubakarTafawa-Balewa had a foreknowledge of the 1966 coup
that claimed his life. It was said that the then GCO Aguiyi-Ironsi informed the Prime Minister of an imminent coup a
week before the coup, but he just didn't shove. On the 14th of January, the British government were said to have
given him invitation to pass the night at the British High Commission in Lagos to escape the coup, he turned it down
revealing that the mutineers will still kill him there! Major General Haruna who was cross-examined by the
OhanaezeNdigbo's counsel, Chief Anthony Mogbo (SAN) who said whatever action he or his troops took during the
war was motivated by a sense of duty to protect the unity of the Country. Hear him in his own words, "As the
Commanding Officer and leader of the troops that massacred in Asaba, Owerri and Ameke-Item, I acted as a
soldier maintaining the peace and unity of Nigeria." He went further, "If General Yakubu Gowon apologised, he did
it in his own capacity. As for me I have no apology, it was as barbaric as the 1966 coup; it was as barbaric as the
pogrom, if there was also any other atrocity, the Kano extra judicial killing was as barbaric as that." Haruna also
recommended that General Muhammadu Buhari, General Yakubu Gowon and General Ibrahim Babangida be
charged with failure to investigate the 1966 coup during their different terms as head of States. He said, "Charge
Buhari, Gowon, Babangida for not investigating the 1966 coup on the grounds of dereliction of duty." The clown
forgot to mention the trial of the perpetrators of the July 29th retaliatory coup.

On further questioning as to the rationale behind Arewa Consultative Forum (ACF) tagging the 1966 coup an 'Igbo
Coup' in spite of AlhajiBalewa, M.D Yusuf then a police officer, Col. Maimalari and many others of Northern
extraction having prior knowledge of the coup, he declined response,butdisclosed that the North had planned a
Jihad on the day of the coup, insisting that the statement "Igbo, Igbo, Igbo you are no longer part of Nigeria"
credited to the former Prime Minister (Balewa) was a misinterpretation of the actual intent. On the Gideon Akaluka
incident of 1994 in Kano, Gen Haruna said that it was wrong to say that the Kano State government never punished
the killers of Mr Gideon Akaluka, saying 20 unarmed persons were victims of extra-judicial killings which were
supposed to be a deterrent. In his words, "My Lord, I do not know who ordered the extra-judicial killing, nor where
they were killed. All I know is that the Kano State Government killed 20 people linked to the barbaric act." In his
highly inhuman and highly insensitively unguarded words, "As the commanding officer and leader of the troops that
massacred 500 men in Asaba, I have no apology for those massacred in Asaba, Owerri and Ameke-Item. I acted as
a soldier maintaining the peace and unity of Nigeria," he declared. Going by the above, Major General Haruna
showed that he is just like his boss Gowon, although I love his guts as to being bold to declare his position without
mincing words, unlike Gowon who pretended to be remorseful whilst keeping a posture of innocence despite the
fact that commanders under his watch were killing and maiming innocent lives. At the remembrance of the Oputa
Panel, one can't help ask whateverhappened to the likes of Lt Gen Bamaiyi, Sabo, Major Mustapha and the rest of
the Oputa commission fame. Are they still in jail or roaming as free men pursuing normal businesses? These
amongst other questions adroitly beg for answers.

Nigerians were no doubt extremely naive to have expected anything good to come out of a Human Rights
Commission that Obasanjo, who apparently stands labeled as one of the most dishonest and genocidal
kleptomaniacal Heads of States ever, set up. Another drama that played up was a dreary chapter in the nation's
annals which were revisited at the Human Rights Violations Investigation Commission (HRVIC) as President
Olusegun Obasanjo filed his defence over the burning in 1978 of the famous Kalakuta Republic. The property was
owned by family of the late afrobeat maestro, FelaAnikulapo-Kuti. The stage for probing revelations about the
military invasion of the republic was set when Fela's younger brother, Late Dr. Beko Ransome-Kuti a human rights
activist, filed a petition at the panel. Being a strategic politician with a well-laid out game plan, Obasanjo set up the
commission for his own selfish reasons and had nothing to do with human rights. He seemingly hand-picked the
cases. Although the likes of the former Head of State, General Yakubu Gowon who had a critical role-play faulted

                                                                                                            Page 3 of 3
                                               A Life in Justice [analysis]

the setting up of the Oputa panel saying that onlyGod could bring about the much-needed reconciliation in the
country,again emotionally tendering a public apology to the people of Asaba for the mass killing of their kinsmen
during the civil war, pointing out that he did not approve of the killings..

The report which captured the strength and weaknesses of the media coverage of Nigeria's version of the post-
military era of the truth and reconciliation panel set up by the Federal Govern ment to assuage the pains of victims
of human right violations was thrown to the thrash.A member of the dissolved Justice Chukwudifu Oputa
Commission on Human Rights Abuses, Reverend Father Hassan Matthew Kukah's request asking the government
to release the commission's report to prove it's sincerity to correcting the wrongs in the country, fell on deaf
ears.The Oputa public sitting was some national dialogue. It was a major national dialogue that brought some
recommendations. For those who read in detail, they will discover that, perhaps, if we tookthat panel report
seriously, Nigeria had no needto set up another dialogue. A commendable Justice Chukwudifu Oputa's panel gave
clues to those who killed Giwa, saying they may never even be publicly known unless the federal government bows
to pressures from well-meaning Nigerians to reorder a thorough investigation into the gruesome murder. The Oputa
commission on further hearing of two petitions on Giwa's murder December 11reported that the military made
deliberate efforts to cover up and frustrate official investigations into how Giwa died. With the foreboding that his
cover will be blown-away, Babangida sought to Battle Oputa Panel, as heand his ex-security chiefs, Brig. General
HaliluAkilu, and Col. KunleTogun, rushed to the Abuja High Court presided over by Justice BintaMurtalaNyakoto
listen to arguments from lawyers he hired with a view to stopping implementation of the report of the Human Rights
Violations Investigation Commission. A truth-seeking Justice Chukwudifu Oputa went home disappointed, as the
matter was not heard but instead adjourned. Typical of our nation with its dark life, Nigerians likeJustice Chukwudifu
Oputawho gave their time and efforts to the success of the commission with a view to providing accountability, were
no doubt worried that the President kept quiet and allowing the Panel's report gather dust in the archives. The
silence over the report was simply an 'spoken but unspoken' word saying human rights violations has gone with the
Wind.

The Oputa panel report may not have been capable of addressing all aspects of human rights abuses in the
country, but Nigerians wanted to have a pedestal upon which they could gauge what to do and what to expect,
especially as the nation approached the real transition, which was from civil to another civil rule.. Now that a man
who championed a just cause is dead, failure to immortalise him would in no small measure reinstate Nigeria as a
banditry state where state power is solely organised to shield criminals. Living former President Olusegun Obasanjo
would have assuaged the feelings of Nigerians as well as restored the confidence reposed by Nigerians in the
ability of the panel to carry out its functions uninhibited, instead it used the state to shield abusers of human liberty.
It is evident that myriad of atrocities which played out years before the Panel was set up are being replicated in
present day Nigeria, but with graver dimensions. Nigeria might not have Mandela in the land, but a simple reality of
life borrowed from the law of Karma for the unwary people, is that the day of reckoning for those who had used and
abused their public offices to violently violate the fundamental liberties of other citizens is near. Posterity will judge!
ïÂ® Having lived a worthy life in Justice for the cause of humanity, Nigeria owes Justice Chukwudifu Oputa a great
deal, by immortalising him in every way possible.


Load-Date: May 12, 2014


  
