

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 2
                                    NMMA honours PUNCH, others - Punch Newspapers




                     NMMA honours PUNCH, others - Punch Newspapers
                                                            The Punch
                                                 September 22, 2022 Thursday



Copyright 2022 Punch Newspapers Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 508 words

Body


The PUNCH newspaper has been honoured by the Nigeria Media Merit Award for endowing the Olu Aboderin Prize
for Entertainment Reporter in support of media development in the country.

The newspaper was honoured at the NMMA's 30th anniversary flag-off and corporate recognition dinner, attended
by media experts, captains of industry and other dignitaries in Lagos on Tuesday.

The award was received by the newspaper's General Manager, Digitals and Publications, Mr Ademola Oni; General
Manager, Corporate Affairs, Mrs Olufolakemi Gbemuotor; and the Editor, Weekend Titles, Mr Olusola Fabiyi.

The Chief Host of the event was the governor of Lagos State, Babajide Sanwo-Olu, who was represented by the
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Information, Olumide Shogunle.

The event was flagged off by the Chairman of the NMMA Board of Trustees, Dr Haroun Adamu, while NMMA
Trustee and Administrator, Samuel Akeju, thanked God for how far the organisation had come since its inception.

The keynote speech was delivered by the Chief Executive Officer of the Nigerian Communications Commission,
Umar Danbatta, who spoke on &ldquo;Current Issues in the Telecommunications Industry in Nigeria.&rdquo;

He was represented at the event by the commission's Director of Public Affairs, Reuben Muoka.

Related News

Punch requests forfeited assets' details from EFCC, ICPC
PUNCH appoints Joseph Managing Director/Editor-in-Chief as Osinubi retires
US Mission congratulates PUNCH's new editor, Oketola

According to the NCC boss, the commission is proud of the NMMA and would appreciate more collaboration
between the media and the commission towards achieving Nigeria's communication goals.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                               NMMA honours PUNCH, others - Punch Newspapers

He said, &ldquo;There is no gainsaying that the quality of our society's media system is significant to its ability to
harness and harvest its resources for growth and development. That explains why the NCC guards its relationship
with the media very jealously.

&ldquo;In other words, our relationship with the media is a partnership that is both collaborative and strategic. This
relationship is not underlined by the fact that the media is a constitutionally recognised social institution in all
societies; it is underscored by the fact that the Nigerian media's systems of communications have lived up to other
responsibilities as special enablers of Nigerians' aspirations and development.

&ldquo;So, the NCC has never taken the media for granted, and the commitment to nurturing the relationship is the
reason the commission has dedicatedly honoured the request by the media for engagement towards nation building
and development.&rdquo;

Special recognition was given to a veteran broadcast journalist, Mohammed Ibrahim, who was also celebrating his
82nd birthday on the same day.

Also, the founder of Arise Television, Nduka Obaigbena, was recognised by the NMMA for his over 30 years of
commitment to the media industry.

The Guardian and ThisDay Newspapers were honoured for endowing the Alex Ibru Prize for Investigative Reporter
and the Dele Giwa Prize for Editor Reporter, respectively.


Load-Date: September 22, 2022


  
