

                                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2
                                                      Al-Mustapha's acquittal




                                               Al-Mustapha's acquittal
                                                         The Sun (Nigeria)
                                                       July 21, 2013 Sunday



Copyright 2013 The Sun Publishing Limited Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company All Rights Reserved




Length: 759 words

Body


After 14 years of trial, victory finally came the way of Major Hamza Al-Mustapha, former Chief Security Officer
(CSO) to the late Head of State, Gen. Sani Abacha, and Alhaji Lateef Shofolahan, former aide to the late Chief
MKO Abiola, following their discharge and acquittal by the Court of Appeal sitting in Lagos.

In the July 12 unanimous judgement, the Appeal Court quashed the conviction of Al-Mustapha and Shofalahan by a
Lagos High Court over the murder of Alhaja Kudirat Abiola, wife of Moshood Abiola, the acclaimed winner of the
annulled June 12, 1993 election.

In the ruling delivered by Justice Rita Pemu, the Justices set aside the judgement of the lower court and held that
the prosecution failed to establish the charge of conspiracy and murder against the appellants. They also ruled that
it was foolhardy and unreasonable for the lower court to have convicted the appellants when it was evident that the
prosecution had a bad case. The court averred that there existed a huge shadow of doubt in the case of the
prosecution, which ought to be resolved in favour of the appellants. The Appeal Court concluded that "in a criminal
trial, the burden of proof is beyond reasonable doubt and this is a chain that cannot be broken." It held, among
others, that "the prosecution listed four witnesses - PW 9, 10, 11 and 12 - as witnesses which it intended to call at
the trial, but never called any of them." It was, perhaps, based on these technicalities that the matter was resolved
in favour of the appellants.

Expectedly, the ruling has elicited mixed reactions. While the victors' relations are celebrating and applauding the
outcome, the same cannot be said of the Abiolas, who feel that the victim had not got justice.

It will be recalled that Justice Mojisola Dada of the High Court of Lagos had on January 30, 2012, found the
accused guilty of the offence of conspiracy to murder Alhaja Abiola, contrary to Sections 324 and 319 of the
Criminal Code of Lagos State. The High Court had relied on the evidence of Barnabas Jabila (a.k.a Sgt. Rogers)

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 2
                                                Al-Mustapha's acquittal

and Muhammed Abdul (a.k.a Katako), the two prosecution witnesses, which she adjudged as credible and reliable
enough to convict the appellants.

While it is good that this matter has been concluded, it is depressing that it dragged on for so long a period. That
such a criminal matter lasted 14 years in our courts speaks volumes of our criminal justice system. Ordinarily,
murder cases should not take so long to resolve. Keeping suspects in detention for 14 years is inexcusable.

It is also lamentable that the case, like many other high profile murder cases in the country, has neither established
those who committed the murder, nor given justice to the victim. This judgement has not solved the riddle of who
killed Kudirat Abiola. This accounts for the family's rejection of the verdict and their insistence on getting justice.
Since the Appeal Court allows for appeal within a period of 90 days, aggrieved parties can explore such option in
furtherance of their search for justice.

It is regrettable that the country's criminal justice system has been unable to unravel almost all high profile murders
in the country. Perhaps, that can also explain why such murders still occur. If those behind earlier killings had been
brought to justice, it would have deterred others from such high level criminality. Up till today, the justice system has
not resolved many murder cases including those of former Minister of Justice, Chief Bola Ige, renowned journalist,
Dele Giwa, Onitsha-based human rights lawyer, Barnabas Igwe and his wife, Amaka, and Peoples Democratic
Party (PDP) chieftain, Harry Marshall. The apparent foot-dragging on these and other killings, despite recent
assurances by the Police High Command that the Force will reopen investigations on all high profile murders in the
country with a view to resolving them, is not helpful at all.

It is, however, worth pointing out that many of the high profile murder trials failed to secure conviction of suspects
based on technicalities. In this regard, it is necessary for our judges to consider the submission of the respected,
retired Supreme Court jurist, Justice Kayode Eso, on the use of technicalities in deciding cases like these. In Udo vs
State (1981), Eso held that "this court has said quite often now that technicalities should not inhibit the exercise of
justice. This is more so in capital cases." It is time we resolved all high profile murders in the country to give
substantial justice to the victims and their killers.


Load-Date: July 21, 2013


  
