

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 4
                                                      77 Hearty Cheers for Kongi




                                             77 Hearty Cheers for Kongi
                                                      Daily Independent (Lagos)
                                                         July 17, 2011 Sunday



Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1680 words
Byline: Yemi Adebisi
Dateline: Lagos

Body


For foremost literary icon, Prof. Wole Soyinka, who added another year to his glorious and eventful life, tributes
have continued to pour out like a fountain, since last week.

President Goodluck Jonathan was one of the voices in the endless list, who are extolling him for his contribution to
humanity as a literary giant and human rights activist. The President, sent a congratulatory message to the first
African Nobel laureate in Literature, who clocked 77 years on Wednesday July 13. He described him as a national
treasure and a source of inspiration to generations of Nigerians. "We take great pride in your exceptional intellectual
accomplishment. We also cherished that fact that you have remained unwavering in your commitment to the quest
for the entrenchment of democracy, good governance, equity and justice in our nation," said Jonathan, wishing him
a more robust health and several more years for fulfilling services to humanity. Part of the activities to celebrate the
77th birthday of this great playwright and mobile library (as described by a literary critic), in Lagos was a lecture
packaged on local government system and media roles.

The lecture, entitled, Re-evaluating Local Government in Nigeria: What responsibilities for the media was organised
by the Wole Soyinka Centre for Investigative Journalism.

It was a gathering of who-is-who in the media, politics, academic, electoral body and students.

Though he was not physically present, the event was predominantly overtaken by showers of encomium on the
great literary giant, WS, as fondly called by close friends, from virtually all the speakers while evaluating the worth
of his contributions in the socio-cultural and political hegemony of the country.

The guest lecturer, Bayo Olukoshi, professor of African Politics and Government and Director of the United Nations'
African Institute for Economic Development and Planning (UNIDEP), Dakar, Senegal, in collaboration with other
discussants such as Dr. Abubakar Momoh, Hon. Afeez Ipesa-Balogun, Kadaria Ahmed and Muyiwa Adekeye, paid
glowing tributes to Soyinka for inspiring the younger generation, who adores him as a role model.

Olukoshi indicted the local government in Nigeria as an institution that spectacularly mirrored the colonial Sole
Native Authorities in post-independence era.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 4
                                              77 Hearty Cheers for Kongi

Lamenting the inability of the council to deliver, he said: "We are badly governed. We are also under-governed.
When Governor Fashola delivered to the people what ordinarily should be done by the local government, we see
him as a hero."

He specifically observed that the local government councils in Nigeria were regrettably dysfunctional in structure
and failed in their roles, stressing that they had never become a foundational structure for democracy and
development.

Among other things, he noted that the laxity of the local governments in Nigeria was traceable to such factors as
lack of autonomy, prolonged military rule, lack of strong revenue base, corruption and lack of true federalism.

He also blamed the under-performance to the failure of successive governments to depart from the concept of
decentralised despotism on which foundation the local government system was built.

"Military rule created distortion and inconsistencies that weakened the local governments and subjected them to the
whims and caprices of the federal and state governments," he said.

He therefore called for the revitalisation of the system, maintaining that local government must be developed in the
interest of democracy and development.

Olukoshi, asked the media to use their investigative powers to build awareness on the roles of the councils.
"Ministers of government were forced out of office in the seventies because the media exposed their corrupt
tendencies," he recalled.

Prof. Ropo Sekoni, one of the speakers, urged the media to bring the repertory of the local government on the front
burner, assuring that the Freedom of Information Bill (FoI) passed into law after 10 years of incubation would assist
them in carrying out their work as effective watchdogs.

However, Soyinka had earlier on Sunday July 3, lamented on the future of Nigeria, describing it as a country with no
more genuine role model to take up the leadership struggle for the betterment and emancipation of desired society.
He said those who really meant well for the leadership struggle had all died and thus left yet-to-be-filled vacuum.

He made the remarks in his address as a special guest of honour at the symposium to mark the 45th birthday of the
President, Campaign for Democracy (CD,), Dr. Joe Okei-Odumakin, at the Airport Hotels Ikeja, Lagos.

He declared that whenever he looked around for a possible self-replacement, he found it too difficult to vouch for
any model especially among the youths.

In his assessment, only very few of the so-called activists in Nigeria stand out for the genuineness of what real
human rights groups or personalities should be. "When I look at the vast majority of those calling themselves
leaders, I lament even privately because our youths no longer have role models; role models have all gone, the only
few model we have left is the one we have all come to celebrate today. When I look around and I feel the
consistency of Odumakin, I am comfortable that I will be leaving a good legacy in a good campaigner," he said,
urging Nigerian women to, like Odumakin, take up the challenge of asking questions with the motive of putting
things right.

Vice-Presidential candidate for the Congress for Progressive Change (CPC,) Pastor Tunde Bakare, who was also
in attendance recalled that he joined politics to effect unavoidable change in the nation's polity and social strata. "If
you do not seek power, you cannot change policies; that was what struck me to join politics."

Soyinka's literature spans round all forms of life and gives recognition to the relevance of women in the society.
Unfortunately, Soyinka rarely discusses the women in his life just like one his home-based jolly friends, Odia
Ofeimun, the great poet. Be that as it may, in 1998 a piece was written by William McPheron from Stanford
University, on this subject in commemoration of the 70th birthday of Professor Soyinka 'exposing' how romantic the
great writer was and probably is even at 77. His discussion with Chief (Mrs.) Laide Soyinka, the elderly wife of the
don really confirmed that 'Prof' is as ever romantic as his literature.

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 4
                                            77 Hearty Cheers for Kongi

His report:

"Don't ask me about Wole Soyinka," Laide Soyinka said with a note of finality. "I am not going to talk about Wole
Soyinka. Or, am I Wole Soyinka? If you want a story about Wole Soyinkia, go to Wole Soyinka and interview him.
As for me, no way! I am not going to say a word. I won't talk about Wole Soyinka."

She recalled her encounter with Dele Momodu (Publisher of Ovation magazine), who as an editor with Weekend
Concord, Nigeria's highly successful first Saturday newspaper, cornered the lady for a world-exclusive interview.

"Dele Momodu told me he wanted to do an interview on me as a woman of substance," said Chief Laide Soyinka,
"but, he ended up doing such an elaborate thing on me and Wole Soyinka. No, I won't allow you do the same thing
this time around. You won't get me like Dele Momodu did.

If you want to do a story on Wole Soyinka, go to Wole Soyinka and interview him. As for me, I am not ready and I
am not going to talk about Wole Soyinka."

Ask her how she feels about the Nobel Laureate, and her response comes tumbling out with the speed of light. "Of
course, I love him," she said. "How do you marry somebody you don't love? Indeed, I love him. I admire him. It was
this affection between us that led to the marriage. How could I have married someone I don't admire?"

If there was one moment when Soyinka's elderly wife ever felt proud of her husband, it was when the famous
professor received the celebrated Nobel Laurel award in Stockholm, Sweden, 1986, just when an equally famous
Nigerian journalist, Dele Giwa, first Editor-In-Chief of Newswatch magazine, was bombed out of life through the
infamous letter bomb.

"That was the crowning glory of his literary achievements," said Mrs Soyinka. "That was the international stamp of
authority that he is the King of Literature in Africa, indeed, in the Black World."

She then traced the genesis of the romance between her and the Nobel Laureate to the good old days in the
University College, Ibadan, UCI, where they met for the first time. "We met at the University College, Ibadan," she
said. "I had been admitted to read Arts."

She explained that her husband was a contemporary of the late Health Minister, Professor Olikoye Ransome-Kuti,
both of whom were years ahead of her in the academia.

She also related that the literary icon did not finish his Bachelors programme at UCI, since the college had not been
upgraded to the level of a full-fledged university at that time. "University College, Ibadan had facilities for
intermediate and not full degree," she continued. "So, Wole didn't complete his full degree programme at Ibadan, he
went over to Leeds to do that."

Along with academic pursuits, there was a flourish of romance at the premier university, where a good number of
successful Nigerians met their spouses. For instance, she said, Professor Chinua Achebe got his heartthrob,
Christiana, from the University College, Ibadan, just when Professor Wole Soyinka was wooing her.

"Christy (Achebe) and I were colleagues at U.I.," she said. "We both resided at Queen Elizabeth Hall. Christy was a
lovely girl, very pretty girl and my good friend.

"All the people who later became important in Nigeria had attended the University College, Ibadan at that time. One
of such people is Gamaliel Onasode, who read Classics, and Emeka Anyaokwu, I think, he also read Classics.

So, also did late (Chief) Bola Ige. At that time, Onasode was boyfriend to Bimpe (Aboyade). Although Onasode
didn't end up marrying Bimpe because he dumped her for another girl from his hometown. It was later that late
Professor Ojetunji Aboyade came. She found Professor Aboyade agreeable and got married to him...


Load-Date: August 24, 2011

                                               Page 4 of 4
                  77 Hearty Cheers for Kongi




