

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 3
                                            Kaleidoscope: an artist's rite of passage




                                Kaleidoscope: an artist's rite of passage


                                                      The Nation (Nigeria)
                                                   August 30, 2022 Tuesday



Copyright 2022 The Nation All Rights Reserved




Length: 1151 words

Body


 July 27. Like a general being pulled out after eons on the battle front, Toni Anthony Ogunde began the first stage
of his exit from the Yaba Art front, at 65, in 2023.

The curators dubbed the show 'Kaleidoscope: An exhibition and discourse on the practice of Toni Anthony Ogunde'.
It was at the Yusuf Grillo Art Gallery, Yaba College of Technology (Yabatech), Nigeria's first-ever tertiary institution.

Kaleidoscope was, indeed, an art exhibition of history, trends, culture, evolution and well, deep and punishing
thinking, though expressed in strokes of all moods: colourful and bright; dark and dank.

But on the day, another epic irony played out: a regal custodian of African tradition was a victim of 'African time' - a
contemporary vice, though blamed on Africa's past.

Indeed, in Camara Laye's The Raddiance of the King, the author tried to romanticize the flexible African concept of
time, in the Euro-African culture clash of that novel.

But here, an African King, real life, chaffed at that notoriety of non-punctuality, which the modern elite nevertheless
blithely blame on their 'African' past. On that, they expect everyone to understand.

Well, Oba Adebisi Okubanjo, the Obiri of Ayepe-Ijebu, in Ogun State, didn't - and he showed it with dignified royal
unease. To honour the celebrator, a boyhood friend and classmate at the Odogbolu Grammar School, Odogbolu
(OGS), he had left his kingdom at around 6:30 am, for an event slated for 11 am.

When Ripples breezed into the venue, roughly around 11 am, the Kabiyesi was already seated. Light music was
on; and guests were already filling up the space. Yet, the event was nowhere near starting - the lateness blamed
on some clash of meetings.

Oba Okubanjo was billed to attend a 1 pm meeting at the palace of the Awujale of Ijebu Ode, the paramount ruler of
the Ijebu. But to accommodate his Lagos Kaleidoscope engagement, he had asked that the meeting be pushed to 3
pm.

                                                                                                            Page 2 of 3
                                        Kaleidoscope: an artist's rite of passage

Yet, it was well-neigh 1 pm - almost two hours late - and the Kabiyesi still patiently waited. Meanwhile, Alaba
Olusoga and Ripples, made up the OGS early birds. Deji Cole, another old mate, would breeze in much later.

Mercifully, the event started around 1 pm, after Obafemi Omokungbe, an engineer and Yabatech Rector, strode in.
It was the sole dark patch on an otherwise glorious day.

But even as the wait wore on, a video clip served the guests what would pass for Toni Anthony's answer to James
Joyce's alter-ego biography: A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man.

As soft music played, the clips beamed the many landmarks, personal and career, of the artist and dress non-
conformist - the bohemian ethos of the artists' commune.

Even then, one clip stood out: the artist's meeting with the Great Alhaji Lateef Jakande, iconic journalist and
visionary 2nd Republic Lagos Governor.

It was ode to glorious symbiosis - the artist impacting his environment as much as the environment had impacted
him. That, of course, was the 'meat' of the rich visual exhibition to shortly follow.

From the starting point, though late, Kaleidoscope offered nothing but sumptuous and filling visual feast.

For starters, the exhibitor's many monikers were as kaleidoscopic as his bewildering oeuvre of cross-media art:
Ogunde. Otunba. Comrade. King of boys. Toni Anthony. Salt of the soil ... all endearing terms.

To be sure, Ogunde is no alias. That's his real name: Anthony Bandele Ogunde. But perhaps only the Oko-Oke
boys, his old classmates, would call him that: just Ogunde.

Not Dele, his first name. Never Anthony, his baptismal - who even knew that, at the bloom of boyhood; at the cusp
of teens: the age of questioning and experimentation; the epoch of rebellion?

The monikers belonged to a latter era: the Yaba years. Ogunde's elder brother testified at the event that 'King of
Boys' might have dated back to his sibling's student days, when he lived in the boys' quarters of an uncle's official
quarters, on the Yabatech campus - a facility the free and feisty soul threw open to all and sundry.

Otunba. Salt of the soil. Toni Anthony would later segue into the artist's large presence, on Yaba Art's very wide
canvas, in the unending dialogue between the Gown, from where Toni Anthony's strokes jutted out; and the Town,
the community that the painter moulded into endless experimentations and improvisations, as decreed by his
creative muse, in bouts after bouts of creative perspiration.

That much was clear from the pieces of audacious art on display.

The very first, 'Kuru pa kuru', beams ram fighting, a sporty yet dangerous treat on the Lagos landscape - cultural
kaleidoscope? - each time the Ileya Muslim festival was in the air.

Now, that could be lethal sports! Many a youth preened and crowed over their champion ram, which somehow had
out-butted and subdued others. But other youths sometimes turned their festive homes into grief when it all turned
fatal - and their ill-fated ram, near-fatally butted, is rushed to the slaughter, with life seeping out of it!

The artist captured that grim, bitter-sweet drama in simple black-and-white strokes.

But perhaps the most densely poetic, yet ultra-simple in colourful strokes, is 'Dele-Cases' - the tragedy of three
'Deles', as creatively captured by another Dele, from his artistic observatory.

He pushed the linguistic pun of: 'Dele' for 'daily', to tell a grim but simple tale: many of Nigeria's daily tragedies need
not happen! That remarkable piece of telling symbolism birthed in 1989.

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 3
                                      Kaleidoscope: an artist's rite of passage

In 'Dele-Cases', the academic cap symbolized the late Prof. Dele Awojobi, the University of Lagos mechanical
engineering whiz, who practically cut short his illustrious life, by 'over-thinking' the Nigerian quagmire, during the
2nd Republic (1979-1983).

The fountain pen symbolized that avant-garde journalist, Dele Giwa, among the quad that introduced weekly
newsmagazine journalism into the Nigerian market, with the flagship Newswatch, now defunct. Dele Giwa was
parcel-bombed, during the Ibrahim Babaginda junta (1985-1993) - a brazen murder yet to be resolved.

The third symbol, an athlete's spike shoe, sunk in blood-stained grass, belonged to Dele Udoh, a patriot and star
athlete, cut short by rogue police bullets!

The three were yoked together in common but avoidable tragedy! But they were lucky to have another 'Dele'
sketch out their odyssey in sombre yet brilliant art - 'Dele-Cases'!

'Otunba's flair for crowdedness is brought to bear in the harvest brush strokes of colours,' wrote Pius Ehita
Egiolamhen, PhD, Dean, School of Art Design and Printing, Yabatech, in a special commemorative brochure,
'which are composed into a visual language to provoke, instigate and inspire ...'

Kaleidoscope delivered on all these fronts - and more. Toni Anthony proved that he indeed learnt at the feet of
Prof. Yusuf Grillo, Dr. Kolade Oshinowo and the very best of Yaba School of Art. But Gown or Town, the artistic
feast goes on.


Load-Date: August 31, 2022


  
