

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                         'Insurgency started with Dele Giwa's bombing'




                           'Insurgency started with Dele Giwa's bombing'
                                                     The Nation (Nigeria)
                                                  November 21, 2014 Friday



Copyright 2014 The Nation All Rights Reserved

Length: 534 words

Body


The Chairman, National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), Prof. Chidi Anselem Odinka, has said the violence
carried out by Boko Haram started in 1986 when top journalist, Dele Giwa, was killed with a parcel bomb.

He spoke in Kaduna yesterday when giving a keynote address at the inauguration of Moluma Yakubu Loma Centre
for Medical Law, and the MIVE Legals Matrimonial Centre, Kaduna.

Odinka lamented what he regarded as democratisation of violence since the return to civil rule in 1999.

The Professor of Law accused former Borno State Governor Senator Ali Modu Sherif of impoverishing the state by
under-educating the citizens, among other things.

He said: "Contrary to what people think, the phenomenon, which has now become Boko Haram, actually started at
an Ikeja street on October 18, 1986. That day, the first Improvised Explosive Device (IED) was used to blow up
Dele Giwa. Everyone knew that it was a state-sponsored murder. "That was the first time that an IED went off on
Nigeria soil. Series of events would later lead to Boko Haram today. At that time, the late Gani Fawehinmi had the
courage to challenge the state on that murder. But he was persecuted until his death.

"The police officer, who investigated the murder, was also killed in un-explained circumstances in Mokwa, Niger
State. He was the younger brother of the celebrated writer and critic of government, Tunji Dare.

"When a state sponsored the murder of its citizens, it lost its legitimacy as a government. So, today's terrorism
started as a state sponsored. In its 2013 report, the Kabiru Turaki Report laid out starkly footprints of the extent to
which the claim of the Nigerian state to a monopoly of violence was challenged.

"The democratised violence is the symptom, which now defines most Nigeria's underlying ailment. Many things can
kill you in Nigeria, to the extent that our life expectancy is now 47 for male and 51 for female and is still dropping.
This is compared to 61 in Rwanda, which had a life expectancy of 41 before the genocide, which claimed 10 per
cent of its population in 1994. Life expectancy there is still rising.

"Of about 320,000 policemen we have in Nigeria, about 100,000 are acting as personal guards to VIPs. The rest of
160 million will have to do with about 200,000 policemen. Our 60,000 soldiers are deployed to perform police duties
in 32 states, stretching them thin to the extent that we are attacked by external forces.

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
                                   'Insurgency started with Dele Giwa's bombing'

"Politicians must be blamed for today's violence. They buy arms for thugs and force their way to power, just to find
out that they can not retrieve these arms.

"Some deliberately impoverished their people to keep them ignorant. For example, in Borno State, on or about
December 14, 2006, the then Governor of the state, Ali Modu Sherif, in a response to widespread criticism of his
record or lack of it as a governor, said: 'A lot of falsehood has been published over the years in newspapers about
my government. I have never lost sleep over them because less than five per cent of Borno people can read what is
written in newspapers.'"

The professor hailed the initiative of the founder of the two centres, Gloria Ballasom, saying they were the first of
their kinds in the country.


Load-Date: November 20, 2014


  
