

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 2
                                                    The Media and 2011 [column]




                                           The Media and 2011 [column]
                                                             Leadership (Abuja)
                                                      May 19, 2010 Wednesday



Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved

Length: 1110 words
Byline: Kunle Somorin

Body


"The media's power is frail. Without the people's support, it can be shut off with the ease of turning a light switch" -
Corazon Aquino

I have heard many feats ascribed to journalists, including the power to make and mar. It is not impossible that the
journalist himself or herself thinks he's the next mystique after the almighty. In Nigeria, journalism has assumed a
confounding status that most men of power often bow and tremble before pen pushers.

In 1983, at the height of the political apostasy that culminated in the landslide victory of the then ruling party, the
National Party of Nigeria (NPN), one of the beneficiaries of the flawed process that was eventually mitigated by a
military interregnum, Chief Victor Omololu Olunloyo, laid flat before media practitioners to underscore his trepidation
at the awesome power of the pen.

At the trajectory of history of political evolutions, the media has found it's both as a tool for eventuating the good
and the bad in political actors and institutions. Some people would argued, that but the pioneering media
networking of Nnamdi Azikwe, the Enahoros, Davies and Obafemi Awolowo, our dream of an independent Nigeria
as a corporate entity could as well have been a pipedream.

What is incontestable, is that the media has been a malleable instrument with which political inform, misinform and
aggregate or disaggregate unity and progress. That is why, where the media functions well, the lives of the reporter
is always in jeopardy. Our country has been fraught with unresolved murder of journalists - Dele Giwa, Godwin
Agbroko, Bayo Ohu, Abayomi Ogundeji and lately, Edo of The Nation newspaper.

It's the fear of more murders that compelled me to honour an invitation to a Media Roundtable on Electoral Reform
on Tuesday. Held at the instance of the International Republican Institute (IRI), and facilitated by two expatriates,
Prof. Ivor Gaber and Jesse Roberts from, of all places, Institute of War and Peace Reporting! I was alarmed at the
name of the institute, but was consoled that the facilitator preached peace rather than toe the life and death stance
that political warfare has assumed in our country.

Beyond the yawning gap in terms of capacity and disposable income compared to the politicians, who the public
love to distrust, the journalists are increasingly becoming endangered species as most of them earnIt's the fear of
more murders that compelled me to honour an invitation to a Media Roundtable on Electoral Reform on Tuesday
unpensionable salaries, chased by goons and mollified by the people.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                                            The Media and 2011 [column]

Unfortunately, these are the only set of professional that the constitutions ascribed responsibilities to as gate-
keepers of the commonwealth. How can they wade through the mesh of ethical, societal, financial and moral
inhibitions that daily trail them? The Media has come to join the judiciary, in the unanticipated duty of returning
electoral verdicts and legitimizing polls.

We dissected the challenges in achieving fair and unbiased coverage of elections. Utopia, as the ideal, is the
journalist has a role to play. The reporter, it turned out could be likened to the devil on the cross, most of the
reporters own up to the challenges posed by biased owners, whose interests are less than altruistic. Because most
of their employers are partisan or have been compromised by pecuniary or to be more charitable, commercial
interests, certain class of 'friends of the house' are treated as sacred cows. Impediments are thus created for a
level-playing reportage of candidates and parties.

Since, most newspaper proprietors and electronic media owners don't pay their workers as at when due and where
they do, they are grossly underpaid and reporters have to resort to underground dealings by chasing adverts,
becoming part-time media managers to political parties, politicians, heads of election monitoring agencies are those
they should ordinarily maintain oversight responsibilities over.

The big question is how do you take gratification without obligation? Clearly, an underpaid journalist, who
fellowships with a corrupt public office holder or aspiring leader, he is himself not credible. If you cannot give what
you lack, it goes without saying that a journalist or media owner without integrity is himself without integrity and by
that very fact, part of the malfeasance that plagues our electoral process.

The quest for credible, free and fair election places a burden on the reporter. Self-examination of that constituency
and the need to set guidelines for practitioner, a regime of sanctions and motivation for noble ones should therefore
be emplaced if the 2011 elections would be successful. Concerned that many journalists are falling victims of
mindless killings, the Roundtable urged the authorities to tackle the issue of public security as a desideratum for
reform of the electoral system, while ensuring that people entrusted with to be umpires in the elections have no
antecedents like their immediate predecessors.

The battle line has been drawn between those who are patently bent on using the journalists to achieve diabolical
end through planting and mischief making. And that's where the issue goes beyond legislating rigging out of
existence. Fine legal instruments could assist, the media could be empowered and exert self-control measures
through regulatory authorities, but the onus will be on the desire of the citizenry to hold dear the tenets of
democracy and embrace value re-orientation. Anything short of that we mean, no lessons have been learnt and
business as usual.

The rabid display of infantile exuberance by the House of Representatives, I tarry to say, the House, which I had all
along thought to have equal stake as its Senate counterpart deserve the slothful description of a Lower House. I
couldn't understand what manner of shenanigans came over a few of them as they chorused and sang like
members of the Students Representative Council of a Polytechnic or College of Education, while the were solemnly
requested to consider for confirmation, Arc. Namadi Sambo as Vice President of the Federal Republic.

Compared to the conduct of Senators, I was greatly appalled at the way and manner some of them floundered the
historic opportunity. I know understand that immaturity was a good enough ground for them to resist sitting jointly
with the distinguished men of the Upper Chamber to review the 1999 Constitution. A lot more need to be done in
building the capacity of some of our legislator whose ineptitude has no comparison in our country's history. And
that's where to reform the polity, because these are ordinarily the closest people to the electorate.


Load-Date: May 20, 2010


  
