

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 3
                               Dahiru Lawal On Yushau Shuaib: Less Sense, More Nonsense




             Dahiru Lawal On Yushau Shuaib: Less Sense, More Nonsense
                                                    Daily Independent (Nigeria)
                                                       March 27, 2022 Sunday



Copyright 2022 Daily Independent. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved




Length: 1386 words
Byline: Tony Eluemunor

Body


I know that some medicines could be worse than the diseases they are meant to cure, especially when the
recommendation is from a quack doctor.

I also know that as Chinua Achebe noted about Onitsha Market Literature phenomenon, inadequate learning has
not stopped some persons from writing books to educate their fellow men and to make some profit on the sidelines.

So, I know full well that quackery, even audacious quackery, did not begin today and that it has been acquiring
turbulent virulence and extravagant boasting. Yet, when Mr. Dahiru M Lawal reacted to my column of 6th March, I
was shocked.

It lacked civility, was uncoordinated because he rambled on and on, jumping from one issue to the other. It was an
unfocused chaotic clutter; a total mess.

Not one error listed against Shuaib, whom he praised as his mentor, and projected as a Mass Communication
genius and philosophical prodigy of Aristotelian dimensions, was refuted. Error number one: he wrote, "Sometime in
2021, my mother was denied boarding on an Air Peace plane going from Ilorin to Abuja, even though she was
among the first set of passengers who arrived at the airport very early that morning.

Apart from frustrating her attempt to board the aircraft, the airline further charged her exorbitantly for the use of the
same ticket for the next day's flight." That is a severe charge against an airline. A few sentences later this
appeared: "Mama came early but was on the wrong queue at a counter of another airline.

By the time she realised the mistake, the Air Peace Counter had been closed". Yet, Shuaib still wrote in that article
of March 4th: "Sometime in 2021, my mother was denied boarding on an Air Peace plane".

Is that not a blunder in reasoning, if one is blaming A for B's mistake? Is that not pure illogicality, warped thinking,
self-contradiction? Oh, reader, what could have made an "award winning" Lawal to refer to the Wikipedia as a

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 3
                           Dahiru Lawal On Yushau Shuaib: Less Sense, More Nonsense

journal? Journal? Haba Mallam, haba! It is an online encyclopedia while a journal is ..., no, I will leave that
undefined for Lawal may want to debate me too on that.

Now, I will jump to three important issues; his attack on my person as a journalist and Chief James Onanefe Ibori's
defender and the awards Shuaib has been winning.

Yes, some nonentity once mocked me as too untalented to work for the PUNCH, Guardian or THISDAY and not
wining any journalistic awards, saying that explained why I became Ibori's spokesman to defend a corrupt politician.

I replied that I worked in the PUNCH two weeks and left to pursue an M.Sc. degree in Mass Communication at
UNILAG. After that, Dele Giwa invited me into Newswatch in 1986 (and I add for Lawal's benefit that within two
months there, I won an award for Initiative and Excellence. "Oga" Ray Ekpu wrote the citation that tagged me "a
child of promise" and asked others to emulate me. My next place of work was THISWEEK where I won a double
promotion, rose from Correspondent to Assistant Editor within three years and headed two different Desks; National
News and Politics and wrote cover stories for three consecutive weeks, perhaps a first globally in any well-seeded
media house.

In 1990, my fourth year in journalism, Harvard's famed telephone call came and I became a Fellow and Ford
Foundation scholar at the Nieman Foundation for Journalism, the first academic fellowship and the most prestigious
one for journalists.

Oh, I still remember that I was invited into Reuters office in Lagos that same year and asked if I would be free to
accept the Reuter's Fellowship at Oxford University. Stupidly, I replied that I preferred to go to Harvard; I didn't ask
if the Oxford admission could have been deferred! And for you, Lawal, I joined the Guardian in August 1999 and
within a month or two the Saturday Editor, Banji Adisa, asked me if I could turn my essays into a full-fledged
column; that was the birth of Abuja Notes.

Do I need to add that I acted as a West African Correspondent for the second largest newspaper group in Africa
then, The Daily Nation of Kenya, or that Dr. Stanley Macebuh invited me to be Deputy Editor at the Post Express?
Or that I have toured Eastern Europe at European Union's expense in service of journalism? If you want more
about my writing, please say so and I may tell you how I was contributing to the Daily Sketch twice a week by 1976
and '77 ever before I went to the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, for my first degree. Yes, I was contributing to the
opinion and sports pages and was paid N7 for each article.

Thank you, dear Kayode Ojo, who was Sports Editor then. Please take on me on this for I have more to say; the
money the Editor of Monthly Life paid me saw me through UNILAG; thanks to you Mr. Wole Olaoye, now a
businessman and columnist for Daily Trust.

You said that I shamelessly defended a "the most corrupt politician in the country". My reply is in three parts; one,
only simpletons doubt that Ibori was targeted because of his politics.

He supported the late Dr. Alex Ekwueme's presidency bid in 2003.

Also, only self-deceit can make a journalist think that there was an anti-corruption war during Olusegun Obasanjo's
presidency and Nuhu Ribadu's time at the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission.

Three, I am still defending Ibori from ignoramuses too blind to see the injustice done to him. Somebody was willing
to be someone's attack dog. It is likely, too, that you may have heard of Third Term bid.

I wrote on Sunday May 30, 2004 (or so) that someone would attempt to change the constitution to allow him
become President for a third time, and that it would fail.

That was in a special presidency two-page series that ran in the Daily Independent for one week. You stated that
THISDAY heaped tributes on Shuaib; I saw where a lady interviewed Shuaib, not a THISDAY editorial, not a news
item. THISDAY? I forgot to tell you that by 1995/96, I sat on the Editorial Board of THISDAY.

                                                                                                         Page 3 of 3
                           Dahiru Lawal On Yushau Shuaib: Less Sense, More Nonsense

So far, checking for the awards, reminded me of what Achebe said about a bad dictionary; you would take a
confusing word to it and it would give you a more perplexing one. Remember that you wrote that Shuaib (or his
firm?) won "the Most Creative PR Agency Worldwide 2020 by Global Creativity Index GCI and Statista, the world-
renowned statistics portal". Searching for Global Creativity Index, I saw "The Global Creativity Index 2020" which
listed countries; "Australia takes the top spot, followed by the United States and New Zealand.

I looked up those behind GCI and saw an article in BLOOMBERG; "Richard Florida is a professor at the University
of Toronto's School of Cities and Rotman School of Management. Mr. Florida explained in that 2010 article: "Earlier
this week I identified the world's leading nations on innovation, technology and the creative class.

I have created, the Global Creativity Index". Then, further mutations of GCI came up like variants of Covid-19 virus.
I have to stop here to await Lawal's reply and then, I'll speak on my hunt for the powers behind a certain GCI award
and how it led to Statisa and PRovoke.

So far, I found no news of the body/bodies and the award in Reuters, Associated Press, or American or British
newspapers.

I still wonder how or why a certain variant of GCI which turns to Statista/PRovoke will say something and no
organization will report it except your prnigerianews (which published the inanities against me) and from there
Nigerian newspapers got the news, quoting prnigerianews.

I know that there are awards and there are "awords". One means something relevant; one stands for just hot air.
Ade Ogidan On Late Donatus Duru Nothing saddens the soul like death.

The African-American musician, Roy C (Hammond) put it succinctly in his "Fireside" pop music; "Like life when
death comes around, we are so sad." It steals laughter from our hearts. And the death of others reminds us that our
own hearts "are beating funeral marches to the grave".

Please let's lengthen that quote from A Psalm of Life by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: "our hearts, though stout
and brave, still, like muffled drums, are beating Funeral marches to the grave.

In the world's broad field of battle, in the bivouac of life, be not like dumb, driven cattle! Be a hero in the strife!"
Strife? Many have called me to ask if Daily Independent was not a national paper from inception and other
questions.


Load-Date: March 27, 2022


  
